Family of 4 stayed for 3 nights in Room 117 on the ground floor. Whatever the staff are being paid, it's not enough. I've never stayed in a place that is more customer focused. Nothing is too much trouble, in fact, at times I feel like I'm taking advantage of them! Nice little breaky is supplied to get you on your way. A short walk to Hollywood Blvd with lots to eat, see and do provides a terrific location. The pool is great after a day of exploring LA. Large rooms with plenty of space, aircon and kitchen facilities with fridge, microwave and stove. Free snacks, drinks and ice-cream are available - yup - free. Can't say enough good things about this place. Highly recommended!More--------------------------------I'm sorry I can't give the Hotel and Staff more than 5 stars; they deserve more. From the day our group arrived for a large local wedding, the Staff was nothing but smiles and service. The 'Popsicle Hotline' at the pool was huge hit; white gloves and trays. 8-)

I've stayed in many hotels in many places. Your staff, from Front Desk to Housekeeping, is the best I have ever encountered.----------------Mr. Nanning...

You are too kind! We're so glad you had such a great experience.
Many happy years to the wedding couple!

Sincerely
Darren Ross----------------I can only mirror other customers' positive reviews, excellent staff, great location, refreshing pool and a family-like atmosphere. My only somewhat negative comment is on the size of the room, that was really tiny for two adults, and the somewhat outdated bathroom.----------------Hello,

Thank you so much for writing a review.
I'm so happy you had such a positive experience.
With regard to the room; you stayed in one of our 7 "Single Queen" rooms. These are indeed small rooms. Most of our rooms are very large 1 & 2-bedroom suites. Please contact me directly the next time you make a reservation...I'll make sure you experience a suite.

Thank you!

Sincerely
Darren Ross----------------What a welcome you receive when you arrive at this hotel! we were greeted by smiling faces and a cold refreshing drink. My boys were in absolute heaven when they were told that there were snacks available free of charge at all times day or night and that there was a soda machine that they could use at any time. There was also a popsicle phone in the pool area which they could use to order a popsicle and during the afternoon and evening, there was an ice-cream machine for them to use.
The staff are the friendliest I have ever met and they couldn't have done enough for my family. They advised us on how to get around and they even took us by car up into the hills on our last night so we could visit the night market.
I was treated to a bottle of wine one evening as I sat watching my kids in the pool and felt truly looked after here while they did all my holiday laundry!
Thanks to all the staff, especially Bryan, Chris and Andrew! You guys are great!----------------This place is at the peak of what customer service should be. Where else would you get a hotel manager taking out lolly ices to the kids by the pool??? Our room was basic but had everything that we needed. The staff go the extra mile and are more than helpful with every request. Snacks and soft drinks are included in the price which is a really nice touch. The manager chris is a legend. We will return to this hotel----------------We absolutely loved this hotel. There is such a lovely welcoming feel to it, and the service is second to none. The rooms (apartments really) are huge and spotlessly clean, the kitchen was well-equipped, and there was a free laundry service, which was fantastic and very speedy. Our family loved the pool (with flotation aids for kids) not to mention the complimentary snacks and drinks. It was so family-friendly - we were lucky enough to see Alfonso the Magician at breakfast one day, and he was brilliant. Nothing was too much trouble for the staff here, if you are looking for a peaceful little oasis not far from Hollywood Bl and the Walk of Fame, we highly recommend this hotel. We can't wait to go back.----------------