I bought the Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge G935F in Black from this product page a week ago.A lot of people have asked questions about this particular international version so I'll answer some of those first. For starters, the one I got was the english edition for the Saudi Arabia market (see attached photos, the guides came in english and arabic). From what I can tell, the phone is the same as any other international edition but with different preinstalled apps. Mine came with a SA region specific app "Shaid" (seems to be a YouTube-esque app in arabic) that I uninstalled and WhatsApp. Other than that the only remaining bloatware was stock Samsung apps (no carrier apps, thank god), the only other thing I noticed that may be region specific is the S Planner app has a "Hijri dates adjustment" setting. Lastly this version ships with a non-us wall charger (aside from the regular stock accessories) shown in my review images. Mine also came with an adapter for use within the U.S., I have tried it and can confirm that it works with fast charging.This phone also uses a different chipset (manufactured by Samsung, called Exynos 8890) than the U.S. version. Reviews I read noted that the phone was actually optimized for this chipset w/ better performance and battery life than the U.S. Qualcomm counterpart (Google it). In the U.S. version the Qualcomm Snapdragon 820 chip is used to support Verizon and Sprint customers whereas this version only supports GSM carriers.To preface the review of the actual use of the phone, I have owned the following devices and used them each as a daily driver for at least a months time: Samsung Galaxy S4 GPE, Samsung Galaxy S5, iPhone 4, iPhone 4S, HTC One M8 GPE, iPhone 6, iPhone 6S, Nexus 5, Nexus 5X, Nexus 6P. The Galaxy S7 Edge has been the most delightful experience of the bunch. I won't go into great detail here but the camera is phenomenal and launches faster than any other phone I've owned w/ a double tap of the home button. The camera's auto focus is super fast and I feel like I'm able to get a capture a lot of moments that my previous phones were too slow to shoot. It's also nice to be able to change the quick launch apps on the lock screen, I have the dialer and snapchat as mine.Continuing a theme of high performance this phone is incredibly fast despite powering a QHD resolution screen. Apps are surprisingly quick to load and multitasking is a breeze (I even found some use in the Samsung's split screen feature). The fingerprint scanner is on par with apple devices (and nexus 6p/5x) although because of it's non-circular shape I find that I place my finger the wrong way more often. The battery is the best of any device I've used as a daily driver, I've been able to get through days of heavy usage like today (unplugged from charger at 5:45am, now at 25% at 9:03pm).The screen is BEAUTIFUL. Not only is it easy to read even in direct sunlight (something I have seen other devices struggle with) but the colors are vibrant and the screen is huge without making the phone too big or bulky. Perfect for watching YouTube videos and browsing instagram.Lastly a few notes if you buy this phone:- If you're not a fan of the stock Samsung launcher you can get the Google Now launcher from the Play Store, it's the same one used on Nexus devices and feels smoother than Samsung's launcher.- This time around Samsung decided to give you bigger icons which drove me nuts, search for "Get more on your Galaxy S7, S6 or Note 5 screen with hidden DPI scaling settings" from Android authority to get a 5th column on the home screen and smaller UI elements.- "Edge functionality" is just okay. The feature feels a bit less than polished because of the weak offerings in the Samsung app store - I have it turned off.Edit 4/8/2016: sorry about the quality of the photos of the actual phone - they were shot with the wide angle lens of my GoPro whereas the other images were shot with the S7 Edge.Edit 4/10/2016: added some higher quality images from my new camera.Update 5/9/2016: I've been using the phone as a daily driver for over a month now. I'm still impressed by the overall gfx smoothness, how fast apps load, and camera performance.Update 7/25/2016: still in love with this phone. I'm honestly not sure what would compel me to purchase a new phone at this point.. I also rooted the phone and changed the emojis to the iOS 9 set with the Emoji Switcher app from the play store. No more guessing when messaging my iOS friends =)A lot of commenters have asked which seller I purchased mine from: Wireless Everything.
The Galaxy S7 Edge is a nice phone. There is no questioning that. It's certainly good that Samsung brought back the expandable storage via the Micro SD slot because it was obnoxious for them to ask for $200 more for the larger capacity phone last year when you could have bought your own extra storage for $30.The S7 Edge still doesn't have the removable battery which is a problem for me as I like to keep phones for a few years. Batteries only last a year or two before they start to show a noticeable reduction in performance. I like being able to get the $20 replacement battery, pop it an and be on my way.And while the S7 is a great phone otherwise in every category, there are budget phones now that are starting to get pretty darn good for around $200 to $300. They aren't as good as the S7, but they are as good as the S4. So they are 2-3 years behind, but the phone tech from 4 years ago was pretty good for the average user. I was ready to buy the S7. I had it in my hand at the T Mobile....and just decided to go with a lower cost phone. The S7 is awesome, but I couldn't justify the price tag.The S7 Edge earns it's value for 2 types of phone users though. People who want an really good camera in their pocket at all times and people who like to play high end graphical video games. If you are one of those people, then this might be a good value at $700 for you. If you just want to make calls, text your friends, take the occasional picture, and play a couple fairly simple games, you might consider one of the more budget friendly phones by companies that were considered off brands 3 years ago but who now are making very quality phones. (Asus and Accetel come to mind. There are others. There are also some really garbage off brands that you want nothing to do with.)Or maybe you just want a massively overpowered phone, in which case, this is the one for you. No one really NEEDS a Ferrari either, but I certainly understand why people want them! The S7 is the same way. It's probably more powerful than you need, but it's awesome.But as for the Galaxy S7 the reintroduction of the micro SD slot for expandable storage makes it a significant improvement over the S6. Just be careful when buying a micro SD card. Stick to the major brands (Samsung, SanDisk, Kingston, etc). A large number of the off brands are fake cards. They might have 128GB printed on the side and might even show as 128GB in the phone, but they are really 16GB cards that have been hacked. once you get the card, even if its a name brand from a reliable seller, test the card to make sure it's actually the real capacity it claims to be by either using a testing program called h2testw or just put 40gb of data on it and make sure you can read it back properly.
Buyers Be AwareThis shipper has send me 'FAKE" Samsung cell phone.Everything looks almost similar to the original Samsung but many features do not work especially the Camera makes terrible low pixel pictures, no screen stability, always lagging behind and many more.... buyers be aware.Although I send it back immediately, I am still working to get my money back.
Oh, another year 2016. Another set of phones from manufacturers! I have been hooked onto get the latest phone every year syndrome and love reviewing specifics. Disclaimer, I love Android and have been using from very early days. Samsung Galaxy S7 still is evolutionary. If you have an older phone more than 2 years old, absolutely get this. So do check local specs. I played around with both S7 and S7 Edge for few days and my opinions are based on this. There are tons of reviews going into lot of details, so I am focused on few other aspects like what’s out there and how to compare specs. Overall S7 and S7 were very slick. If I have to make a choice between S7 and G5, I will slightly lean towards G5 but both are fantastic!First Big Changes: microSD is back. And back with a vengeance 200 GB. I love it, and have been using it in my current LG as well.  Unfortunately, the battery is non-removable, has not been addressed. The only flagship to feature a removable battery so far this year is the LG G5. I know many of you loyal Samsung fans says BUMMER! I was a diehard fan of Samsung till S4, then I went to LG G2/G3. I was very curious to try out S7 as they are most talked about now. Why did I love it?! Screen is a beauty on S6 – Just Gorgeous. Just go to a retail store and feel it!The Edge feature is still gimmicky. I think it will fold into regular phones at some point. It is certainly fancy and nice to show off, but I would rather buy an Android wear watch like Motorola 360 or Samsung Gear or LG R series.IF YOU HAVE LAST YEAR model of any phone, PLEASE DON’T upgrade. Phones are becoming so standard and power packed it makes no sense to upgrade and waste money every year. I buy and sell so many phones as it is like a hobby for me, but I stick to one phone as primary for couple of years now. My main requirements are a 200 GB microSD, good screen, battery life and performance. I am trying hard to see if I can live without one.In my opinion, following are key specs to consider when you buying a phone. Most of others are standard or does not matter at all. First size, weight and resolution are part of look and feel. RAM/CPU part of performance. External Storage is part of expandability. Camera is obvious! SAR (Specific Absorption Rating) is an often ignored, but I feel essential to making a buying choice. Manufacturers don’t advertise or mention SAR prominently.phone parameters: {size, weight, resolution, ppi, RAM, ext Storage, camera, CPU, USA SAR rating}Samsung Galaxy S7: 5.61 x 2.74 x 0.31 in, 152 gm, 1440 x 2560 pixels, 5.1 in, 577 ppi, 4 GB RAM, YES MICROSD SLOT (GOOD!), Internal Storage upto 128 GB, Exynos 7420 Quad-core 1.5 GHz Cortex-A53 & Quad-core 2.1 GHz Cortex-A57, Gorilla Glass 4, 16 MP/5MP camera, SAR 1.40 W/kg (head)  1.59 W/kg (body)  NANO SIMSamsung Galaxy S6: 5.65 x 2.78 x 0.27 in, 138 gm, 1440 x 2560 pixels, 5.1 in, 577 ppi, 3 GB RAM, NO MICROSD SLOT upto 200 GB (bummer), Internal Storage upto 64 GB, Qualcomm MSM8996 Snapdragon 820/Exynos 8890 Octa, Gorilla Glass 4, 16 MP/5MP camera, SAR 1.15 W/kg (head), 1.16 W/kg (body) NANO SIMSamsung Galaxy S6 Edge: Slightly lower dimensions, 0.01 in thicker, 6 gm less weight, Same resolution, Curved Screen,HTC One M9: 5.69 x 2.74 x 0.38 in, 157 gm, 1080 x 1920 pixels, 5 in, 441 ppi, 3 GB RAM, microSD upto 128 GB!, 20.7 MP (rear), 4 MP(front for selfies), Qualcomm Snapdragon 810, Quad-core 1.5 GHz Cortex-A53 & Quad-core 2 GHz Cortex-A57LG G5: 5.88 x 2.91 x 0.30 in, 159 gm, 2560 x 1440 pixels, 5.3 in, 554 ppi, 4 GB RAM, microSD upto 200 GB, 16 MP/8 MP, Dual-core 2.15 GHz Kryo & dual-core 1.6 GHz Kryo - H850, Quad-core Cortex-A72 & quad-core Cortex-A53 - H840 , xx W/kg (head), yy W/kg (body) (unknown at the time of writing) Nano SIMGoogle Nexus 6: 6.27 x 3.27 x 0.60 in, 184 gm, 2560 x 1440 pixels, 5.96 in, 493 ppi, 3 GB RAM, no ext Storage, 13 MP/2 MP, Qualcomm Snapdragon 805, Quad-core 2.7 GHz Krait 450, Adreno 420, 1.47 W/kg (head), 0.93 W/kg (body)Apple iPhone 6 PLUS: 6.22 x 3.06 x 0.288 in, 172 gm, 1920 x 1080 pixels, 5.5 in, 401 ppi, 1 GB RAM, no ext storage, 8 MP/1.2 MP, Apple A7, Dual-core 1.3 GHz Cyclone (ARM v8-based), 1.12 W/kg (head), 1.18 W/kg (body)Samsung Galaxy Note 4 N910: 6.04 x 3.09 x 0.33 in, 176 gm, 2560 x 1440 pixels, 5.7 in, 515 ppi, 3 GB RAM, micro SD upto `128 GB, 16 MP/3.7MP, Exynos 5 Octa 5420, Quad-core 1.9 GHz Cortex-A15 & quad-core 1.3 GHz Cortex-A7, SAR: 0.37 W/kg (head), 0.88 W/kg (body)Amazon Kindle Fire: 5.5” x 2.6” x 0.35”, 160 g, 1280 x 720 pixels, 4.7”, 315 ppi, 2 GB RAM, 32 GB, no microSD, 2.2GHz Quad-core Snapdragon 800 CPU, with Adreno 330 GPU, nanoSIM, SAR: 1.34 watts/kgGiven the above key specs, my suggestion to my friends is to choose 2 or 3 KEY features you require (may be large screen size, maybe less weight, maybe more CPU power) and then start nailing down the phones. Definitely and definitely go to a phone or a big box store and feel the phone. Nothing replaces that. In the end you are using it for days and years, so the tactile feel is very important. I have used all these phones and at a high level they are all good. Few things here and there. And yes the cost. If you are in for a new smartphone and has a budget issue, GET LAST YEAR MODEL. They are as good as current year and probably half the cost! In this case I even suggest Galaxy S4 as it is an outstanding phone. It’s much cheaper and you will be happy!!SCREEN SIZE/RESOLUTION:I have experimented with many phone sizes and I have come to a conclusion 5” is the best form factor for me. Your mileage may vary, The display is absolutely stunning with a Quad HD screen and you have to see to feel it.ANDROID UI:S7 has Android OS v6.0 (Marshmallow)out of the box. User Interface has a flatter and simpler design, as is now the trend across the industry. Once you get used to user interface you get used to it. Android is very flexible and when I show my phone to a iPhone users they are usually in awe. I recently showed to my friends the details of processes. Battery usage like which process takes up more battery.S-Health is a big deal, the app is beautiful and the heart rate and oxygen level measurements are great to keep track. I use Runtastic Pro and Nike+, but like the UI of S-Health too.CAMERA:Fantastic camera. One of the best smartphone cameras. Period.PROCESSING POWER:Don’t bother about it. For 99% of users, this is good enough. The phone has more processing power than the rocket that went to moon first time and much more. The games are very smooth, the UI is very smooth.NFC Tags:Wow, this is the most underrated in all reviews. I use AndroidPay constantly. I use it in WholeFoods and it is so easy. I have used at Walgreens too. Get bunch ( I mean around 10) of NFC Tags and use in bedrooms, offices, cars, living room and customize what your phone wants to do in those areas. For example, when I enter the car most often I use a) Navigation b) Listen to Podcasts. So I program my NFC tags accordingly using apps like Trigger and tap my phone to the NFC Tag and boom, phone does both.BATTERY:Do you really need to care for battery anymore. I don’t. Just use the phone. I have battery power banks with capacity as high as 30,000 mAh to 8000 mAh that I can charge virtually anywhere without a power supply. So this has become moot for me in past year. I would also suggest you get power banks and not really care of battery drainage. Use the phone and enjoy!To give a sample, I tried following apps and they just worked awesome.Amazon Mobile, Androidify, Aldiko Premium, Angry Birds (multiple themes), Asphalt 8, Box, Chrome, Android Pay, NAVIGON (from Garmin - offline maps), Nokia HERE Maps, Google Navigation/Earth/Maps, Google Drive, Ebay, Linkedin, Google Music, Tapatalk (awesome forum browsing app), Microsoft One Note (legacy docs, skydrive of 25 GB is good), Microsoft Office, (yes they have for Android!), Subsonic Music Streamer, TweetCaster Pro for Android (excellent twitter client), Twit.Tv, TriggerAsk questions. I will be glad to answer any questions within 24 hours.
The phone worked great. I bought it from Amazon as the seller. I purchased a clear case here on Amazon too. The screen however does break easily, so get a really protective case for this phone. All performance aspects of phone were good, but it only lasted 3 weeks. I hope Samsung can repair it under their paid services. I will find out and report back. I'm in the USA and this is the international version, so we'll see if they will service it.Update 09/24/16 - I called Samsung and explained I want to pay to have the screen replaced, but the IMEI does not come up in their system and they won't touch it. I argued that a screen is a screen and I really want to pay whatever it cost to have it repaired. Samsung said no. If you buy a phone not from your country you may not be able to get any type of service.I called Amazon too in hopes of finding somewhere to send it for quality repair, but no luck there either. Guess I will have to try a mall kiosk.The worst part is the lack of service available from Samsung, especially their paid service. If I'm requesting paid service why do they turn me away?Update: I am sending the phone to a place that will replace only the outer glass. Won't be perfect but functional hopefully. Will post hoe it goes.
I ordered this phone which was branded as an original but it was completely fake. Not only was the Samsung brand not on the back of the phone, but also the features of the phone event the writing was different from the original phone.
Received the phone today. I carefully take a look at the seal as I've heard people claim that the seal is broken from manufacturer. The seal seemed fine at first but if you pay attention, you will notice there's a layer under it.Haven't used the phone yet but I feel like I'm deceived so I return it immediately!P/S: Samsung is starting to sell international version, customers should think about thatBought from Wire**** Pl***
After being a loyal Samsung/Galaxy customer for many years today is a sad day. After only owning my Galaxy S7 Edge for 13 days I have cracked/shattered my front screen. First of all I didn't even drop the phone, my phone was in my lap and I was tossing my lighter (maybe 5in above the phone) and didn't catch it. Well of course It landed right on the glass edge of the finger print/home button and it cracked most of the screen! Like really! I researched online and found that this is a problem many other S7/S7 Edge owners are experiencing, breaking their screen in situations that the screen should be able to withstand. I did not get insurance on the phone because I was confident in the Samsung/Galaxy name, having owned other galaxy phones and putting them though many drops in the 2 yrs I owned them with never any cracks or shattered screens. I am sad to say that if you are looking to upgrade, or just buying a new phone, do not go with the Galaxy S7/S7 egde, because of the build quality alone. The phone itself, as far as operating system and programs is an amazing phone. But the glass phones are obviously not a good idea, even Apple finally went away from it, so why on Earth would Galaxy choose to go to all glass phones! I'd rather they stuck with the cheap (but much more durable) plastic design. I am now stuck with a brand new/broken phone for 2 years, and when that time is up you can guarantee I will be looking elsewhere for durable build qulity, not just flashy looks, I have learned my lesson (Gorilla Glass 4, HA!)....
DesignSamsung's phones this year are very similar to the S6-Note 5 range from last year. The new models still are made of glass (it is Corning Gorilla Glass 4, which is very high quality and durable). But in no way allow the similarity to discount how good they still look. The looks are still fantastic and the black, gold, and silver titanium colors looks premium. The colors no longer have hidden colors that show up in sunlight, as the black color is simply just a jet black and same for the gold. The silver titanium has a mirror like finish to it, so it is still reflective.The Edge design remains a terrific looking device and a lot of fun to look at and interact with. The curved slopes on the sides are the same as last year and creates a cool, cascading waterfall effect when holding the phone in landscape mode and scrolling text.Even today, there is no other phone I find as appealing as the black Galaxy S7 Edge. The jet black color coupled with the curved sides gives the illusion that your screen is floating.The Galaxy S7 Edge brings the welcome return of dust and water resistance. It is now IP68 certified and is water resistant up to 3 feet and 30 minutes. I find this to be a great return to form and something that should be mandatory for all phones moving forward.CameraThe 12MP camera on the back is very good, but I honestly feel like it’s not as great as the Galaxy S6 Edge’s camera, (or the Plus version either). Samsung actually reduced the megapixel count and I feel like it shows. Samsung has stated that due to improved image software and better pictures in low light conditions, it is a worthy tradeoff, but I don’t feel like it was worth it completely. It comes with OIS to help with image stabilization and the camera loads extremely fast. You can load it by clicking on the icon on the home or lock screens or my favorite way: by double clicking the home button. The delay is less than a second which is impressive. The images look great on the screen, but unlike the 2015 models, you lose more detail when enlarging them on the phone and on a computer screen/when printing them out.The 5MP front facing camera is still very good. It has a wide field of vision and takes stellar pictures. It also has a front facing flash which is nice and helpful in low light conditions.DisplayAnother year later and it is still hard to find a better looking display. It’s a 5.5-inch screen and 534 pixels per inch, which creates an unbelievably great looking screen. I would have still preferred it remain the same size as the regular Galaxy S7 like they did last year with the 6 models, but due to the slopes, the size doesn’t really affect as much as it would if wasn’t curved. It is bright, detailed, and showcases amazing color accuracy. Sometimes the colors may appear a little warmer than they are in the vivid setting, but by playing around in the display settings, this can also be corrected if need be.AudioThe audio is good and loud. I do wish the Galaxy S7 Edge would take cues from some of their competition and utilize front facing stereo speakers. When holding the phone in landscape mode and watching a video on say Netflix, it is a little hard to hear at times due to the fact that the sound is only coming out the right or left side only.BatteryThe battery has been bumped up to a 3,600 mAh battery, which is 600 mAh more than the S7 and wow, is it great!. The battery life is superior to last year’s model and does a great job of getting me through the day. The turbo charging is still excellent, but the wireless charging also had some issues with staying connected, and I’m using the official Samsung wireless charger.FunctionalityThe Edge panel allows you to set up a quick swipe option on one of the two sides. It still retains the same functionality as last year where it allows for news briefs, sports scores, or stocks to tick across. It also allows you to set up the ability to swipe for your five favorite people or to go to your most used apps. Samsung has increased the amount of options which now has options such as having a CNN, NBA, Weather Channel or daily calendar app. These new app selections are just much more useful than last year’s options.Unfortunately, the core options from last year are pretty much unchanged. There is still the option to have the side panel light up a certain color for your five favorite people, but only if the phone is face down. It is called Edge Lighting. I would find this to be a more useful and cool feature if it would do this when the phone is face up and just the panel would light up a certain color. Finally, there is a Night Clock option which dimly lights up the side with the time which is the most useful of these apps. Many of the options still feel half-baked and not fleshed out well, so it’s a bit of a letdown to not see those native options be improved very much, if at all.The Always on Display function is nice and useful at times, but I have found it to also be distracting due to one flaw. If you have your phone on your desk at work or by your computer, it is a distraction because the clock will jump around the screen every few minutes. This is due to Samsung wanting to reduce the risk of screen burn in, where if an image is in the same spot all the time, it runs the potential of frying out that particular spot on the screen. That is all well and good, but ideally I would use the Always on Display to silently know if I receive an important text or call. When the screen jumps around, I find my eye wanders to it every time not knowing if it’s lighting up to show a new text or if it’s just simply shifting around.The themes option out of the Samsung store is great and has grown a lot since last year. It allows you to completely customize how you want your backgrounds, keyboard, text messages, and overall aesthetic to look. It is a bit unfortunate to see more and more of the themes to no longer be free like they were when the theme store was first launched.The phone itself works well, although at times there is an issue with lag and app crashes. It was running Android 6.0 Marshmallow and everything worked nicely for the most part. Samsung has gone back to using a Snapdragon processor after spending last year utilizing their own chipset. TheSnapdragon 820 processor of this year is incredibly fast and the 820 is marked improvement over the 810 which would get too hot and stutter at times. This coupled with the 4GB of RAM makes the phone blaze through almost any task with minimal issues. It is among the fastest and most reliable phones I have ever used.  This, combined with the 4GB of RAM the S7 Edge has, means that the phone is up for any task with amazing speed.The fingerprint sensor still feels not as fast and accurate as some of the better options out there. It is accurate I’d say 75% of the time, but sometimes it can be very finicky which is frustrating due to the fact that it’s meant to be both fast and more secure.With Android, you get more customizability in terms of launchers, themes, widgets and colors than you do with Apple’s IOS, but you also have to wait longer for updates, have potentially more issues with security, and have an app store that isn’t as fleshed out or monitored as Apple’s is. Android definitely is for those who want more customizability and are adept/willing to do a little bit more tinkering with it to set it up just the way they want it.I enjoy Touchwiz and the added options Samsung provides. It allows for things like an improved Calendar from stock Android (it shows more information on the month view), added customization tweaks and a multi window to be multitask, although I still can’t see why a basic app like the calculator can’t work there in landscape mode.I am very glad to see the expandable storage options of the past return. It is great to be able to freely be able to upgrade the storage to 256GB which should be more than enough for most people. The 32GB base is also nice and the bare minimum a phone should come with in 2016.If you would like to read more of my reviews, please check out: smartphonehaven.com
I have never bought a phone outside a carrier. That and the fact the label said International and No Warranty really had me concern. Not having ATT branding and stuff cluttering my new expensive phone was enticing though. Not having ATT block or delay my phone updates also was interesting. Having a white phone was a small but nice benefit too. So I cancel my ATT purchase and bought from Mercate Group. ATT said it would ship at the end of month, Mercate said I would have my phone by the end of month. Reality was Mercate quickly sent me my phone within a week. Did not have to pay extra for quick shipping either. When I contacted seller about warranty they said they would honor the 1 year warranty. With no sales tax through Amazon I saved $55, got my preferred phone unbranded and unlocked, quicker and cheaper than ATT. Though I must say ATT activated the phone to my GOPhone account quickly and easily with no charge either. So far I am extremely satisfied with everything regarding this purchase. As far as warranty we will have to wait and hope not to need it. Another thing is that the AC charger included has a European plug but an adapter was included, I think by Mercate,
Problems with my product samsung galaxy s7 edge:1. Samsung galaxy s7 edge Box was not sealed2. It was labelled International version at the bottom of the box and also labelled American sim only at the back of the box3. After starting the device, I noticed the bottom right corner of the screen had a little blacked out portion on the display itself. (maybe damaged item was sent)4. When I opened the unsealed box, content was not arranged as it should be ideally. (It was messed up)
The phone it is ok.. but the charger dont work it for me,  i am from latino america and the charger have an entrance different.. now i am looking for a charger in my country.. i paid 700$ and i can not charge my smartphone......
BEWARE!!!! Do not spend all that money on an international version, if anything goes wrong with the phone within the year, the seller will only tell u contact samsung and when caontacted samsung will tell you that you need to know which country the phone came from and that you would need to send it to that country for warranty repairs. DO NOT PUT YOURSELF THROUGH THE STRESS!!!! WATCH THE PICTURE
This is one of the most gorgeous phones I have seen. I would rather suggest buying from a carrier as they are much cheaper cost wise and you get free VR gear as well. Making it even more worth it.The battery is bigger but personally it is draining out pretty fast even when kept idle. I am assuming it is because of the "always on" feature so I am going to disable that and check out a few more days. But that is least of my concerns as the battery does last about a whole day after a lot of usage.The addition of microSD slot is a good move as even the 32 GB inbuilt memory isnt enough for people like me. Specially when you are buying a high tech phone and expect to do almost every thing with your super phone you need lots of memory.The screen is crystal clear. The phone can take 4K Ultra HD videos which is great.The camera is great and the focus time taken is super fast. The phone is much sleeker.I wish this phone has IR as I loved using that feature on my hubby's Samsung note edge to show off and control almost any TV and even my xbox with it.The phone is pretty much waterproof if immersed in water for few minutes. It has an IP68 rating and can survive in few feet of water for about 10-15 minutes. Even the screen works in the water so you can take pictures and make videos. That is amazing :)You can check out the feel of this phone via my unboxing video.
Mailed out fast! Got it a day early! So glad i got the international version! And there is 4 reasons why.....Reason 1 - NOT FILLED WITH A TON OF BLOATWARE! No At&t crap apps.  It does have a few like facebook and instagram. But most people use them and other than that just disable it....Reason 2 - Because it's the international version... We have the GALAXY LAB! Where you can get the app draw remove! which I enjoy. American Carriers Took it out!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!Reason 3 - Paying full price, I am not stuck in a contract for 2 years where the bill doesn't lower after the 2 years are up. OR not stuck in a monthly contract paying off the phone paying interest.Reason 4 - I HAVE NO STUPID CARRIER LOGO ON MY PHONE!!!! Such an EYE SORE and aggravation for a company to put there logo on another companies devise thats is sold off to the consumer.... its s***ty graffiti.
AWESOME phone. Came prepackaged, sealed, Turned on in English. There was an Arabic file of some sort - which I deleted. The model number matches correctly. No issues or problems getting it going and activated. Took it to my local AT&T store for the sim card and it took a little extra time and a couple of restarts, but after that everything is working great. I'm still learning some of the little tricks that come with it. The cell coverage shows "4G", not "4GLTE". I don't know the difference. The ATT guy said some would say it was better, LOL. I have no idea but, whatever. There are a few pre-installed samsung/google things. Smart Switch uploaded many things, but some things like ringtones were not backed up. I had to go looking for them. In the process, I also discovered some new ones. Battery is doing just fine and lasts as expected. It has it's own Samsung factory warranty - 1 year. I haven't been able to find any way to tell for sure if this is the snapdragon or xynos processor, but as I stated earlier, the model number matches, so....my first experience with an unlocked phone purchase on Amazon has gone well, IMHO. Thus far.
The good:- Stunning display. Impressive 5.5 quad -HD screen shows crisp colors from various angles. Best screen on any smart phone.- Beautiful curved design is an eye-candy.- Camera is not 12 megapixels and superior to S6 and iPhone. Auto-focus is also has great speed leaving others in dust.- Large 3600mAh battery  is like having a phone + battery case without actually having the thick battery case. Hard to kill that battery in a day.- Always on mode constantly displays notifications without the need to unlock the phone. Again, the battery is so good.- Water resistant. IP68 rated which means the phone can be totally submerged in water up to 1mt deep and 30 minutes.- Micro SD expandable memoryThe Bad (not so much though):- Not removable battery pack. But 3600mAh is plenty. You can watch a full season of Breaking Bad with a single charge.- No USB-C so it's not future proof, but then again the lifetime of the phone is 1-2 years.- Only 32GB version available in US. But you can overcome this with micro-SD storage.Overall this phone makes me smile. It looks stunning, feels good in hand, performs fast, packed with tons of goodies and battery lasts long time. I would still definitely pair it with a phone case though to add grip and provide some protection against scratches and drops. I've ordered a bunch of cases and my favorites are Galaxy S7 Edge Case, LUVVITT [ClearView] Hybrid Scratch Resistant Back Cover with Shock Absorbing Bumper for Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge - Clear for a crystal clear slim protection and Galaxy S7 Edge Case, LUVVITT [Ultra Armor] Shock Absorbing Case Best Heavy Duty Dual Layer Tough Cover for Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge - Gunmetal / Black for sleek looking Armor style protection. Very high-end yet reasonable priced cases.
I paid for a new phone,  but the phone I received was already set up and displays 7 voicemails from the 19th of April thru the 13th of May, and the plastic film was put back on upside down. WTH! Sadly not only are they thieves,  but they are incompetent thieves!
The Edge models were a mistake. Samsung makes great products, but the Edge is just a failed gimmick. The edges on the phone screen actually distort both sides of the screen, actually causing difficulty viewing the whole screen at every angle. The idea was to enable viewing notifications from the side of your phone, but that was an unnecessary feature, and really only created functionality problems.  The rounded screen edges cause several problems. It causes an impossible glare on both sides of the phone anytime there is a light source to reflect it. This is a problem everywhere; outside and inside. And it doesn't matter how you turn your phone, the glare remains along the edges, and is a big distraction. On regular flat screen phones, you can get rid of glare by turning your phone. This is not possible with the Edge. Also, the screen is distorted on the sides where the "edge" is, because the picture "rolls" around the sides of the edge like old fashioned TV's; but much worse.  It's very distracting to view pictures, watch video, and play games. One final problem caused by the edges of the phone is that cases made for it have to keep the edges exposed in order to fit the phone and view the screen.  This makes the screen ultra-vulnerable to scratches and breaks.  Most cases don't even come past the plane of the front of the screen!  Even the bulkier ones.  For comparison, I've owned a Galaxy S5 for 2 years without scratching it.  I work in construction, and have dropped my S5 probably hundreds of times.  Had an Otter Box case on it, but removed the screen protector to prevent dust from getting between it and my screen.  Somehow the S5 screen is still perfect!  I just bought the S6 Edge Plus, and the exposed edge of it got scratched the first few days with a case on it.  Hopefully, Samsung well concede that the edge was a mistake, and they will discontinue it. I recommend the regular S6, S7, or Note models. You will be much happier with any traditional, flat-screened phone.
I purchased this S7 edge back in March. After two months, it started showing some screen color issues with annoying purple stripes all over the screen and the cellphone itself feels hot. I had to set the brightness to the maximum to temporarily "avoid" screen issues. And what's worse, the screen just died completely and I can't even turn off this phone since the screen is no longer functioning. Now I am trying to return this failed S7 edge and get my money back and never gonna buy any Samsung product again.
I’ve read review after glowing review about Samsung’s current flagship phone, the Galaxy S7 Edge, and it makes me wonder if I’m using the same phone that they are. I know when a new product gets reviewed, the experience is different because they only try it out for a few days before writing about it. To be fair, I rather enjoyed my new phone for the first month or so as well. But now that I’m a few months in, it’s really starting to piss me off. It’s almost to the point where I want to use it as a wireless hotspot for my old, deactivated iPhone 5S.Here are the eleven biggest (yes, there’s more than eleven!) pain points I’m experiencing with my Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge:BEAUTIFUL BUT HIGHLY FRAGILEThese phones are engineered to break – both your heart and the phone itself. I cannot say this emphatically enough – Gorilla Glass is not a selling point, because it provides no protection for the delicate, breakable design of this phone. The S7 Edge has glass on the front and the back, and it will shatter at the slightest ding. We know. One of our two identical phones shattered within a week without a case. This must be protected at all times by a sturdy, impact-resistant case like an Otterbox. That’s a shame for a phone that’s designed like a piece of art.BIG BATTERY, MEET POWER-HUNGRY PHONEThe Galaxy S7 Edge may tout one of the largest batteries on the smartphone market, but it does little good when it’s paired with such a power-guzzling phone. I routinely – really, at least five days a week – go from 100% charge when I wake up to less than 50% by noon. (And that’s on a good day.) This isn’t a two day phone. If it’s a one day phone, I probably forgot it at home all day. The one saving grace is the built-in Quick Charge 2.0 capabilities, but I’ve found myself creating a network of strategically placed QC 2.0 charging banks at my most visited spots at home, at work and in my car. I even have a power bank six times bigger than the S7’s battery that I carry most of the time.STORAGE SPACE: 32 GB IS THE NEW 16Several years ago, I got my first smartphone and my first Android phone – Sprint’s HTC Evo. I experienced a pain back then similar to one of my biggest pains right now, which is the frustrating lack of on-board storage. The Evo rocked a staggering 1 GB of on-board storage and came with an 8 GB SD card. The problem was that so little of the on-board storage was available for apps, and not all apps supported running off an SD card. It was a constant barrage of “out of space” errors.Forget about the all the media we download or generate. There should be adequate room for the apps we use. This is, after all, a smartphone. I’ve used a 16 GB iPhone for two years, and it’s criminal that Apple had such a small phone on the market for so long. One would think the 32 GB of space on the Galaxy S7 Edge would be serviceable, but I’m getting the same space crunch that I experienced with the Evo all over again.I’ve scaled my installed apps back to the bare minimum that I use on a somewhat regular basis, which is about 150. I don’t know if that is a low or high number on average, but that’s me. There are 109 of those that must live on the phone, including all the non-removable bloatware apps from Samsung and Verizon. I’ve moved all 40 or so apps that can be moved to the SD card. I store all photos and videos on the SD card. I’m still under 1 GB of free space, which is rendering the phone as a whole laggy and unstable.This is not an issue unique to this phone. Most of the phones on the market are singular 32 GB models. There is the “adoptable storage” feature of Android Marshmallow that could ease some of these issues, but Samsung doesn’t allow its use on this phone (at least, without some clever workarounds).APPS DON’T STAY PUTThis is also more of an Android frustration, but exacerbated by the limited storage issues of the phone. I’ve worked so diligently to move all eligible apps to the SD card to keep my precious free space in tact. But whenever an app updates, it moves the app back to the internal memory, requiring me to move the app all over again. This is not a speedy process either, and there are certain offenders like Facebook’s portfolio of bloated apps that update all… the… time. Last night, I had 9 apps auto-update on me, which gave me a lot of work to do during breakfast this morning. Is the phone really smart if it can’t remember where to store an app after it updates?THE CAMERA IS FRUSTRATINGLY UN-SNAPPYPart of the appeal of a smartphone for most – and 90% for me – is having a good camera with you at all times. A good percentage of the decision to do this phone instead of another iPhone was the quality of the camera, especially in low light. Unfortunately, the camera is anything but reliable. In fact, it’s downright infuriating in critical situations where I need a responsive camera at the right moment, whether that’s a family picture or something for work. The camera has been, more often than not, totally unresponsive to taps of the shutter, and when it is responsive, there is often a delay causing blurry, unintended results.Then there’s the video performance. Dropped frames are present on every video, no matter what resolution I shoot with. There is a noticeable delay between pressing “record” and the start of shooting, and there is almost always a delay between audio and video at the end of the recording. Other apps also seem to have negative effects on the performance of the camera. I would often get glitching and sync issues when I had Google Now set to listen in any app. Disabling that helped, but the performance of the camera is wholly disappointing, so much so that I now often carry my old deactivated iPhone 5S with me every day solely as a reliable pocket camera.IT’S A HOT MESSThe Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge is possibly the best phone ever for people who have cold hands. It’s gets warm a lot, and overheats several times a day, in a wide variety of everyday situations. When it goes into its “Cooling Down” mode, performance severely degrades, which adds to the frustration of the experience. I get the times when it goes into this protective mode if the sun shines on it while it’s in my car mount, but not when it’s just sitting on my desk charging. I currently have it in a Spigen Neo Hybrid case, which has a reasonably thin silicone backing. It’s not thick enough to cause heating issues like this. So as a phone it’s not so great, but as a hot plate for keeping your coffee warm, it’s certainly capable.STARTING OVERThis thing reboots a lot on its own at random (inopportune) times, or at least it thinks it does. I can’t quite make out a pattern for why it does this, but sometimes it will just up and restart itself. Then there’s the times where it seems to restart itself without going through all the motions. I’ll try to unlock it with my fingerprint – also a process that’s nowhere near as snappy as they lead you to believe – and it tells me that I must use my pattern unlock because it just restarted. Although, it didn’t. That aside, you’d think that the performance would be better because it’s starting up fresh after a reboot, but you’d be wrong.TOUCHWIZ – AFTER CHEEZ WHIZ, NOW MY LEAST FAVORITE WIZEverybody knows by this point that Samsung’s TouchWiz interface is pretty terrible. I agree. It kills performance, is pretty ugly and not that customizable. So there’s not much more to say about it. Luckily you can do something about it by installing a third-party launcher. I use Nova Launcher, which I mostly recommend. There’s so much you can do with it and it removes a lot of the friction from the user experience. My only qualm with it is some of the icons of apps on the SD card disappear when you reboot the phone. You can back up your layouts to help with that problem though.ALWAYS ON, ALWAYS KIND OF USELESSOne of the biggest selling points of the Galaxy S7 and other phones of this generation is an always on display. The novelty of having a limited display of information like the clock, calendar or notifications seems like a super-handy thing, but in everyday use it’s not that big of a deal. In fact, the cost/benefit ratio considering the battery drain on an already battery-hungry device makes it seem like a non-starter. If there were more customization you could do to what’s displayed, it might be worthwhile, but the options are pretty limited. Most often, I keep it turned off. It’s a feature with unrealized potential, for certain.CUTTING EDGE?Speaking of features with unrealized potential, let’s talk about the Edge. You know, the curved (but barely) edges of the screen that offer convenience in ways the iPhone can’t? Well, I don’t think I’ve used these features more than a handful of times in the few months I’ve owned this phone, and I don’t see that changing. The Edge Panels are not all that useful, at least any more so than getting to the intended places faster than just navigating there through regular means. There are a couple things like a ruler that are handy in extremely limited circumstances, but not enough to justify going with the Edge over the regular S7.In fact, the main reason I went with the Edge was the slightly bigger screen. That said, it’s really not great for watching full-screen content, as there is some color degradation on – and due to – the edges when watching brightly-colored images. There’s no reason for the curve except maybe seeing color strobing when you receive a notification and the phone is face-down, but with an always on display and wireless charging, I never keep it face down. If anything, the curve exists to make the phone more fragile, and it does that remarkably well.SAMSUNG PAY – NO, SAMSUNG, PAY MORE ATTENTION TO SUPPORTING THIS FEATUREI was really looking forward to the day I could leave my wallet in my pocket and use my phone to pay for stuff. Samsung was looking forward to that day too, and has offered multiple incentives to get people using the feature. Unfortunately, they’ve done an astoundingly-poor job of getting banks on-board to support Samsung Pay. I have a lot of cards in my wallet (from both local and national institutions), and I don’t think a single one is supported. I’d love to use Samsung Pay someday, if they ever let me.There was a brief, shining moment where I did actually use the app though. They started allowing you to store membership and loyalty cards in the app. These cards flood my keychain and my wallet, so I was thrilled to be able to add them to my phone. Certain ones like my Costco card are natively supported, while others like my library cards worked by manual addition. I got them all programmed in and ready to go, and I used it once at a grocery store, much to my delight. Then I went the second time to a grocery store with famously poor cell reception and my cards would not work whatsoever. Shortly thereafter, an update occurred and my entire portfolio of cards disappeared, never to be seen again. That was the end of that experiment.IN CONCLUSION, I HATE THIS PHONE WITH A PASSIONI love Android so much better than iPhone for a host of reasons, and I had such high hopes that my original Android experience would turn around with improved hardware. Unfortunately, if this phone is any indication, Android hasn’t matured quite yet and the hardware is largely to blame. For being the Cadillac of Android smartphones in 2016, I find myself dumbfounded as to why my experience is so overwhelmingly negative. I find myself now counting the months and days until I’m eligible to upgrade out of the Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge into a more stable, capable smartphone, and I really wish that wasn’t the case.
I've had nothing but issues with this phone since I got it.  I have apps randomly opening and closing on it's own.  I've read online that it is due to the screen being too sensitive.  I've been waiting for a update from Samsung on this matter but it seems like my phone was from Egypt and I have not received an update yet.  Pretty much the phone has been unusable for me because I can't even type or navigate the phone without it closing me out of applications or opening up ones randomly.  I am very disappointed in this.  What are my options?
Perfect replacement for my old phone which I was using for a couple of months. Before buying this I went through many reviews online to make sure I don't get disappointed after buying this. Was happy to make a good choice and so far has been a good experience.
Bought this specifically because I wanted the Exynos processor instead of the Snapdragon and so that I can root if I wanted to.  I'm on T-Mobile US and did my research to ensure that my bands are supported - which they all are except for some 3G.  I bought this phone from a seller named 'lifeline###' and the box the phone came in had the factory seal.  As another reviewer pointed out, my phone originated from the United Arab Emirates so this came with a non-US friendly charge adapter and the manual appears to be in English & Arabic.  In any case, the phone is great working order and I was able to just pop in my T-Mobile SIM card with no configuration needed, nor a visit to the T-Mobile store!I upgraded from a Galaxy S5 so all I had was the regular charging block which doesn't support the fast charge.  I went ahead and purchased the Aukey QC 3.0 block and I'm fast charging away!
Awesome device, water resistant, pretty fast. It's going to work with a lot of carrier all over the world. Beautiful external case made of glass. Samsung did it pretty good this time, for sure. The product came with an adapter for if you want to use it in the US. Another important feature is that you can still use this in the US and have the 4G compatibility, the only thing that you are going to miss it is the processor as the other US version has a better processor using the snapdragon 820. However, the Samsung exynos is pretty powerful too, so you probably wont feel the difference.
Before buying refurbished phone from seller MASTERTRONICS. I had asked if it was compatible with my provider and if it had large scratches. He assured me full compatibility and no scratches. I have to say he was right phone works perfectly and have not one scratch I would definitely recommend this seller I will definitely purchase from seller again thank you for this amazing buy it could not ask for more.
I'm really pleased with the product,Met my expectations and the information provided by the seller is correct as the photos.I really recommend the product because for me it was very useful.I hope my comments were helpful
The best phone I have ever owned.  It works well when paired with the Gear S2 watch.  Love the screen, performance, camera, and video.  It plays games really well with short load times and you can customize the amount of processing power dedicated to gaming to save battery life.  The battery life is really good.  Can get through a whole day with video, gaming, chatting, taking pictures, and some navigation.  It charges from nearly empty to full in about 40 minutes.  The always on clock is much more functional then I initially expected.  Wanted a bigger screen than the S7 so I ordered the edge.  I like a bigger screen but I do not use the edge tray much.There have been a few niggles since I have owned it, I bought it in May 2016 when it came out.  First, I have had to turn it off completely and then restart it to receive phone calls about once a week.  Do not know why this happens but every few days someone tells me they called several times and my phone didn't ring.  After looking at the service signal I noticed that I had no signal in my house, where I have always had a signal in the past.  Now I have to be cognizant of this and check for a signal regularly. The only solution has been a shut down/restart.  Afterwards it works fine.  Second, sometimes it says there is no wifi even though there is, the only solution again is to restart/shut down.  After the restart it works fine.  The last niggle is that the edges of this phone are active, meaning if your hand touches the sides of the phone, like when you are texting, it presses/changes things unintentionally.  It is not just with me, I have given the phone to strangers to take a picture with me and my family and they nearly always end up hitting the back button or go to the gallery while holding the phone up for a picture.My wife has a Samsung Note 4 and she has not had the issues with signal reliability or the wifi so I am hoping that it will be fixed with a software update.  There have been 3 software updates since I bought the phone and they have not resolved the issue.  All in all, I would recommend the phone, but with reservations that if you are using it for business you may want to look elsewhere.
Authors note: this is a review of only the camera and does not represent other functions of the phone. Although the S7 edge was tested, this review applies to both the S7 and S7 Edge camera.Rating: 4/5What I Like:-Clear, clean images with low noise-Excellent low-light and indoor photos-Shallow depth of field with pleasant background blur-Good colour balance-Smooth high FPS video-Easier to use interfaceWhat I Don't Like:-Daylight images have less detail than previous generation 16MP camerasSummary: While the S7 Edge has a great camera, it's only a minor step up from last  years phones. It was very hyped to me by friends and family so when I finally got my hands on one to test I was not as blown away as they were. I find that my previous generation phone camera is as good or nearly as good in most cases, so I won't be making the switch yet. That being said, this camera is fantastic and a contender for the best camera phone to date, just not as good as I had hoped.------Full Review------Daylight Photos - Rear Camera:In daylight, Samsung's camera reacts like any other recent high end camera phone. The images are overall pleasant, with excellent colour rendition and a good amount of detail. A wider aperture means higher shutter speeds, and reduced motion blur. In comparison to the the LG G4, the LG produced images with more detail at the expense of a slight bit more noise. This difference was fairly significant in some situations where distant signs and details in landscapes would render crisper on the LG. Most people wouldn't notice unless they had these camera phones side by side, and some may even prefer the smoother images of the Samsung, but to me it was as if there is noise reduction being constantly applied at the expense of detail. This isn't always the case however: take a look at the picture of the road. The crop shows more detail in the foreground road with the Samsung, but the license plate is illegible. But with the LG, it is possible to read the license plate of the truck. While in part, this is due to the Samsung being a bit wider angle, but overall the 16MP camera just has a little more detail by nature. The LG isn't without its own problems, for example side by side with the Samsung the colour looks just bad, but the difference between the two cameras isn't enough to make me want to immediately jump ship. Where the Samsung wins overall is in white balance. The colours the Samsung produces are more natural, with just a hint of warmth, and this results in overall more pleasant images. In terms of exposure, I find the Samsung is a little bit brighter and more colourful because it has better dynamic range. It doesn't lose highlights as easily and shadows have more detail. The iPhone 6s+ was the runner up in all categories in terms of detail, sharpness and colour.Low light photos - rear camera:Low light is where the Samsung camera excells compared to any other smartphone I've tested to date. Due to its lower megapixel count, the camera is able to render images with less noise and more detail compared to competitors. This means smoother skin in indoor portraits, more detail and overall more pleasing images. Lens flares and light-stars are far more pleasing than the other phones I tested. Again, it's not enough of a difference that I want to jump ship from my LG G4, but it is better at rendering smooth night images.Autofocus:Autofocus was consistent and fast. I never had the camera fail to focus in good lighting. In poor lighting it was a little slower, but generally still accurate. No complaints here.Front facing camera:The FFC is what blew my mind with the S7. This camera is significantly better than any other front facing camera I've tested to date. It is better because it doesn't have those weird crispy artifacts around edges in the image. It produces smooth skin tones, good colour and low noise in low light.Video:Video with the S7 is very good. It is smooth, does not lose frames and focus is consistent. Brightness, contrast and colour are all excellent. Noise is kept to a minimum. This is another section where the Samsung is great. I didn't get a chance to compare it directly with the iPhone, but it definitely one-ups the LG G4, where I have noticed occasional jittering especially with a slower SD card.Conclusion:After a week of playing with the S7 Edge, I've decided that I'm going to keep my LG for now. Even as a professional photographer the difference in the rear camera is not noticeable enough that I want to move to Samsung. Perhaps it was all the hype that played it up, or perhaps it was something else, but while I was impressed with the camera on this phone I wasn't blown out of the water. The front-facing camera is a different story. It renders significantly better images than any other FFC I've tested to date. Selfie shooters or those who are using older phones such as the Samsung S5, owners of budget phones or the 8MP iPhones will find the difference far greater than others. If you need an excellent camera phone and are on more of a budget, pick up last years LG G4 or a Nexus 6 and you'll be just as happy with the camera.Robert D.DrekiTech
I have been using this phone for three days now. I was impressed that the phone was delivered sooner than expected. The box was sealed and everything was intact. My only problem is that this phone came with a plug you use in Europe and where I live we use the plugs used in the US.  Not a big problem since I can charge the phone with other chargers.  I bought the international version since I read that the Exynos chip is better than Snapdragon. I previously used a Samsung S3 which recently died and it wasn't a difficult transition.  I also have a P8 Lite which in my opinion takes better selfies. I'd still buy the S7  edge again though. The phone is very fast.  Battery life is exceptional.  I have only charged it once so far and it still has 52% of battery life left! I also love that the phone is very loud.  The phone fits easily in my small hands and is pretty light. I also love being able to unlock the phone with my fingerprint.  I also love that the speaker is very loud. For someone who's hard of hearing like me that is a plus!
It seems that most of these unlocked international version phones are unlocked by the sellers themselves, who break the phone's box seal, open the box, and unlock the phones themselves (note that Samsung says "do not accept if seal is broken"). Hence, technically, most of these unlocked international version phones are not really new. I bought a lot of Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge phones from Amazon, and most (not all) had the seal broken.On the phone itself, interestingly, the S7 Edge feels lighter than the S7 (even though it is 3% heavier ... maybe because the weight is distributed differently). The bigger screen is good for people with vision issues, but the resolution is the same as with the S7. The edges are highly annoying, making one touch them by mistake constantly. Furthermore, the edges make it very difficult to properly protect the phone with a case. I do not like this phone. I love the regular S7.
I've always been a fan of the iPhone series. In fact the last one I had was the iPhone 6s Plus. But I recently traded it out for the Samsung Galaxy s7 Edge. This phone is AMAZING and is lightning quick. It's very responsive to your touch and the 5.5 inch screen makes it a breeze to read whatever your doing on the phone. I am HIGHLY SATISFIED by this phone. I think Samsung really outdid themselves this time.
The Samsung Galaxy S7 edge After a few years of active use, my Note 4 was worn out. The daily charges took its toll on the power/data port. Getting a full charge was difficult.Upgrade time rolled around and I went with the Galaxy S7 edge. Full disclosure, I’m a Samsung fan. After reading the specs I knew the edge would work best for me.I love the Galaxy S7 edge and here’s why...* After several days of use I’m amazed at the battery life. I can go for two days on a single charge.* Speaking of charging – it’s wireless. No more damage from plugging in the charger every day.* The display is brighter. I keep the setting on about 60%. My Note 4 was always on 100% brightness.* An awesome camera with new professional mode.* The processor is faster and the S7 runs Android 6.0.1 (so far).If I were to make a suggestion to new Samsung Galaxy S7 edge owners it’s to GET A CASE! With the beautiful metal casing on the back and a very exposed screen on the front, this phone needs some protection.I highly recommend this phone.Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge G935F Unlocked Phone - Retail Packaging - Black Oynx (International Version)
The galaxy s7 edge looks great. Every feature is perfectly matched as description. However, they downgraded the glass on the screen. Last year they used gorilla 4th glass, which is hard and un scrathcable. I noticed some scratching on my phone the seconed day of purchase, I hardly even used it. Yesterday I went to see Batmanv.Superman, the phone fell off my pocket when I was seated. My pocket is like 30 cm to the soft ground but the phone did not make it. I thought I should let others know how bad the glass this phone has before they buy it. I like Samsung, but this is just not what they should do to a galaxy phone.
It's a pretty phone and it's fast and snappy, but abysmal quality control on Samsungs part...Remember those youtube videos where they drop the phone from 3 stores high and the glass is smashed up but it still seems to work fine otherwise? Yeeeah... my first ones screen got messed up simply from it bumping on slightly on the table...I got a replacement but it has defective pixels all over the screen that aren't exactly dead but they go black instead of displaying most colors and considering the phone came packaged with GearVR that's just unacceptable, especially since some of those are right in front of your face which doesn't help immersion one bit I gotta tell ya. The store where I got it from refused to replace it although 14 days haven't passed yet and warranty services are being their usual s***ty selves denying there's anything wrong with it.As far as design flaws go - phone is really easy to drop since it's slippery and thin and you have to hold it awkwardly in order to not touch the edge screens (which are useless and are just a nuisance) AND the phone is entirely covered in glass so there's plenty to crack and break when it falls.All in all - it's not something that should cost a thousand friggin dollars (mine cost 820 Euro) or at the VERY least get your freaking quality control in order to prevent such sloppy obvious flaws
It looks like most and possible all the reviews here on the phone are not from people who have purchased the phone (the F international version).  Some got a S7E directly from TMo US and other US carriers, and others don't sound like they actually bought-tested one at all.This is a fundamental failure with the Amazon review process and can lead to a lot of dissatisfaction with actual purchases.This version does not have WiFi calling and VoLTE, and most likely for now  Samsung Pay.  What would be really helpful here would be actual purchasers who have used this model on US carriers.
I wouldn't recommend buying it online, the phone I got came good but then started acting weird. When I would send out pictures it would not send. Another thing is that when i plug in my earbuds they only work on one side. I checked with many other earbuds and its still the same side, so therefore the phone is defected. The warranty isn't good as well, they would not provide you with a replacement phone while they have it for repairs. Me as a business owner, I can't go without my phone over 12 hours.
Less than ONE MONTH after I purchased this, it's gone wonky...randomly restarting even when I'm not using it, freezing then re-starting when I AM using it...I LOVE the S7 Edge, but I knew buying on Amazon was a BAD IDEA.If there's any way to exchange this item without having to go without a phone for a week, I want to exchange it...but I work from my phone and this is a real crap-storm right now.
5 stars to the phone, 0 stars to ATT. ATT was not able to get 4G connection going on this phone. Blamed hardware. IMEI checked good. Phone would show 4G AP but could not establish data connection with it. Was only working with 3G AP at 3G speed.The thing that did the trick was temporarily inserting SIM card from friend's phone that was connecting 4G. My phone made 4G connection right away. Means hardware is good. Put back my own SIM card. Voila, phone still connects at 4G!
Don't buy these phones because you will have to stand the loss like I did. I purchase this phone in July and when I returned home and start using the phone overheated and burnt the screen. I payee 400 USD to get it fixed and it still haven't fix properly and all Amazon did was sent me $150 for my troubles! I had a loss. I'm out of the country and not returning until May. My business with Amazon with Electronics are DONE! Even after fix there are two shades of light in the phone and the technician said it's a software problem. He said  I should contact Samsung.  I just gave up on everything.
This phone is so much faster than the Galaxy S6 Edge I upgraded from.  The biggest difference I noticed was the battery life lasts double what the last phone did.  Plus, the screen is big.  Can't go wrong with the Ultra HD resolution.  The only problem I have with it is that it's the Italian version and won't let me use the Samsung Pay like my American S6 Edge did.  Kind of a bummer, but we still live in a time where I have to lug my driver's license around, so my credit card might as well come along for the ride.
The phone is great all the features are amazing there is now a front light for along self-esteem just like how snap chat does it the Camera quality is awesome. The battery life is great and it charges quicklyBut within less than a week phone haven't dropped or anything I saw 4 grey translucent lines come upon the screen sometimes when you turn up the brightness it goes away but who wants to have the brightness so high??  I'm trying to find out how I can get this fixed
S7 Edge from United Arab Emirates (its what the phone detials say in the settings). Was brand new and unopened. Works perfectly. Setting it up was as easy as popping a nano sim card in. Was worried something might be faulty but the processor is snappy, screen is perfect as is the camera. No faults what so ever. Ordered Sept. 28 and arrived Oct 1st. I would highly recommend as there is no bloatware and it has a faster processor than US version. Have not tested the waterproof feature to give feedback on that.Seller: Wireless Everything
Woahhhhh, this is what ive been waiting for. This is visually stunning and technologically superb.  The camera is amazing!!!!!! Like its always said you pay for what you get, especially phones.  This phone will be in style for the next 3 years if not more due to its advancements in the cellphone world. Also when you buy from Amazon you know your not buying a fake Chinese made piece of junk, i already verified it from the box and software.Thanks amazon,PS. Its been 3 years since i upgraded phones and this is a major leap from LG.
I love this phone. I have had it for 2 months and it has been amazing!  A great feature that the phone has is the Ultra AMOLED display. Another great feature is going to be the battery life and the phone options so the battery can last longer. The phone has a 3,600 mAh battery. The phone has an “Ultra power saving mode.” This mode will turn off your data unless a phone call is coming in or going out. A text message is going in or out or you manually click on the internet browser. I would highly recommend to anyone looking for a phone. For sure beats out apple.
Took me a long time to decide which online company to go with--but these guys delivered exactly as I expected. I was very hesitant to buy something like this online--but it turned out GREAT. I'm using this phone in Japan now.The only thing to note, with this model, you get a wall pug that (the 'fast charging adapter) that is built for some asian countries--a big 3 prong thing. My fault I didn't read the details, but now I have to get a normal 2 plug (USA type).Anywho, phone is perfect and amazing.
 I Thought that the galaxy S7 edge is the best product but after just one week of use (it was not a massive use because it was my secondary phone) a black lines appeared on the screen when I change the brightness I reset the phone but I noticed it's a hardware issue not a software problem and I found myself unable to do anything because I am leaving the country
This phone exceeded my expectations. I did some research beforehand about the 2 different chips that were put in the phones. I will have to say the international version has lived up to the hype. I've had this phone for about 3 weeks and there has only been one day where the battery was about to die. But this was after a 10 hour trip running Google maps, taking pictures, videos, games and other things. The phone was off the charger at 630 am and had 9% left at 830. Not bad going from a HTC One M7 that couldn't make it to 4pm without a charge. The camera is fast and takes great pictures. I've had a few compliments on how amazing the screen looks. The only thing I have heard other people complain was about not having Samsung Pay, I have never used it and I don't think it's a deal breaker.
I bought this phone for my dad and he is in love with it. It has fast-charging and all the high end specs that you could ask for in a top tier device. I don't know much about it, besides the fact that there hasn't been any issues thus far. It's got some interesting features and is a pleasure to use, I can tell you that much!
I use StraightTalk with this phone. It took no more than an hour to transfer my phone number to this phone, and I had exactly 0 issues with it since. If you want a brand new unlocked phone, I would recommend no further than this. It did come with some sort of foreign software, and Facebook and Instagram seem to be installed and non-removable, but they were trivial to disable.
The good:- Stunning display. Impressive 5.5 quad -HD screen shows crisp colors from various angles. Best screen on any smart phone.- Beautiful curved design is an eye-candy.- Camera is not 12 megapixels and superior to S6 and iPhone. Auto-focus is also has great speed leaving others in dust.- Large 3600mAh battery is like having a phone + battery case without actually having the thick battery case. Hard to kill that battery in a day.- Always on mode constantly displays notifications without the need to unlock the phone. Again, the battery is so good.- Water resistant. IP68 rated which means the phone can be totally submerged in water up to 1mt deep and 30 minutes.- Micro SD expandable memoryThe Bad (not so much though):- Not removable battery pack. But 3600mAh is plenty. You can watch a full season of Breaking Bad with a single charge.- No USB-C so it's not future proof, but then again the lifetime of the phone is 1-2 years.- Only 32GB version available in US. But you can overcome this with micro-SD storage.Overall this phone makes me smile. It looks stunning, feels good in hand, performs fast, packed with tons of goodies and battery lasts long time. I would still definitely pair it with a phone case though to add grip and provide some protection against scratches and drops. I've ordered a bunch of cases and my favorites are Galaxy S7 Edge Case, LUVVITT [ClearView] Hybrid Scratch Resistant Back Cover with Shock Absorbing Bumper for Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge - Clear for a crystal clear slim protection and Galaxy S7 Edge Case, LUVVITT [Ultra Armor] Shock Absorbing Case Best Heavy Duty Dual Layer Tough Cover for Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge - Gunmetal / Black for sleek looking Armor style protection. Very high-end yet reasonable priced cases.
I admit I thought it was shady when the package came, and it seemed like it had already been open and re packaged. I called Samsung to see if this phone had ever been owned by any one else, they could not give me an answer. I do wish they would keep track of their phones, like vin #s on cars. all of that said- I have had it for many months. I have spilled a lot of water on it (no damage). It looks good, the gold is no too flashy, its' a soft gold. The operating system it comes with is great, it is still very fast. Dual sim works. SD expansion slot works very well. Thanks for such a good phone. One caveat: it is huge, can't really hold my phone ad text with one hand.
The phone that arrived is the genuine article and works great--I'm thrilled with how well the battery and fast charging works even when playing Pokemon Go all the time. Also, I have T-Mobile and the phone works perfectly fine.However, even though the app is on your phone, the international model is not compatible with Samsung Pay. If you want that you need to get the American version of the phone. I wish I'd known this, but to me it was worth the savings in price and you can still use Android Pay. But I didn't realize this before buying it and I would have liked to have known.
I must say this first; this phone does not play nice with Sprint.  It continuously goes through this activation loop with Sprint.  It activates (Hands Free Activation), restarts, then activates again in a continuous loop.  I don't know if it's on Sprint's end, or if its their UICC SIM card.  I'm not even sure if it's the phone itself because it's doing the same thing on the replacement phone that Amazon sent to me.However, it works fine with T-Mobile, and the VoWiFi calling feature works well straight out of the box without any user configuration.I haven't tried it on AT&T or Verizon yet.Otherwise, other than the Sprint problem, the phone works great.  The Wi-Fi works well; the display is bright, crisp, clear and brilliant; it's speedy fast (no lag); and it's basic (no carrier bloatware). It has 23 GB of available space out of the box.Another thing, I must say the phone gets really hot and the battery drains quickly, but, then, again, it could be entirely due to the Sprint Hands Free Activation looping thing.  I don't know.  I called Samsung, Samsung tells me to contact Sprint.  I called Sprint, Sprint tells me to contact Samsung.  This is frustrating !I have model number SM-G935UZSAXAA.
The phone that was sold to me as unlocked is asking for a network unlock code.... this is BS, the phone is not actually unlocked.  Wireless Everything is not telling the truth about this.  If I don't receive any contact I can only conclude that I was taken to the cleaners and my money is down the rat hole.
This phone is amazing and easily the best smartphone I have owned. The screen is gorgeous, everything is crystal clear on this phone. The camera is also top of the line for smartphones. It's main camera competitor would be the iPhone 7 but it seems that each phone offers a comparable camera. Also the gold is very attractive and the phone has a great aesthetic.Now for why I deducted 1 star. I owned the phone 3 days before it slipped out of my bag onto concrete and the screen cracked quite a bit. I did have a protective glass cover but not my actual phone case yet. Make sure you have your phone in a case!! Honestly I would probably invest in a heavy duty case since the screen seems incredibly fragile. This was the first time I have ever had this happen. I would still recommend the phone but be aware you should be extremely careful and make sure it is protected. I thought I could wait a few days before putting a case on to figure out what I want but the first time it fell onto a hard surface the screen cracked. Just be advised of that if you get the s7 as a screen repair is in the mid 200s at most shops. If you sign up for phone insurance you can get it fixed for a little less but you'll still be hit with a deductible and have to pay the enrollment cost for the insurance.
Received i phone charging cord  no Samsung cord in box, No US adapter for Intl electrical plug.  The past ( 5 intl phones) all came with adapter for North American electrical outlets. Please send along and then we can have 4.5 stars. Thanks, K.
This phone is a mess. I used to love the first months but now I don't have any signal( I tried 3 conpanies already) and is heaing up and freezing and starting the phone. Also my fingerprins don't work. I can't believe amazon is selling fake phones or damaged phones
The phone is amazing. I can't get the white one in North America so I ordered it through Amazon. The only thing is that it came with a eroupean charger which can easily be fixed by buying a piece to change it to North American styled plugs.
Phone came nice and all but won't hold charge. I need to charge it twice or sometime 3 times a day. I am thinking about doing a reset and see where it will lead me. But now I am away from home and won't be back for 2 to 3 weeks in other to exchange it. Grrrr I hate this
Exynos processor. ISOCELL camera sensor. No Carrier bloatware. Suspiciously missing the Galaxy  S7 Edge logo on the back shown in the photo. Aida64 shows the correct info, though.I've used the phone for over a week, now. I'm very happy with it. Still getting used to some aspects of the interface, but what it does, it does incredibly quickly. No lag in anything. Samsung has some nice features included. I love the health suite. I love the battery life.Cons: the duplicate apps. I want the ability to remove the browser, email app, etc. Things that I don't use. Things that Google also includes. Can't uninstall those either, surprisingly. Also, the whole Edge thing... There aren't enough ways to customize it or the edge notifications which display with the always on display. Also, the built-in so to transfer app data from your old phone didn't work with my HTC One.
This is one of the most gorgeous phones I have seen. I would rather suggest buying from a carrier as they are much cheaper cost wise and you get free VR gear as well. Making it even more worth it.The battery is bigger but personally it is draining out pretty fast even when kept idle. I am assuming it is because of the "always on" feature so I am going to disable that and check out a few more days. But that is least of my concerns as the battery does last about a whole day after a lot of usage.The addition of microSD slot is a good move as even the 32 GB inbuilt memory isnt enough for people like me. Specially when you are buying a high tech phone and expect to do almost every thing with your super phone you need lots of memory.The screen is crystal clear. The phone can take 4K Ultra HD videos which is great.The camera is great and the focus time taken is super fast. The phone is much sleeker.I wish this phone has IR as I loved using that feature on my hubby's Samsung note edge to show off and control almost any TV and even my xbox with it.The phone is pretty much waterproof if immersed in water for few minutes. It has an IP68 rating and can survive in few feet of water for about 10-15 minutes. Even the screen works in the water so you can take pictures and make videos. That is amazing :)You can check out the feel of this phone via my unboxing video.
I will never again buy a phone through a cell service provider. Buying unlocked through Amazon or some other reputable source saves you about 20%, and here's the really great part: no bloatware! Be careful to ensure that the phone will work with your service provider, but if it will this is the way to go without a doubt.
The looks are just awesome - I bought the gold version which wasn't really my first choice but was the only one in stock at that time and I'm too impatient to wait. However, once I received the phone, I was very pleasantly surpirsed by how nice it actually looks - very stylish.The phone is snappy - there is no lag, no slowdown, something I used to notice quite a lot in previous Samsung phones, this was generally attributed to the Samsumg TouchWiz overlay on top of Android - the UI is still very much TouchWiz, but I guess the processor is so powerful now it easily handles the load.The Edge features have been beefed up since S6 days, however ,I still find them gimicky and don't really use any.The bad:On day 2, the phone randomly started turning off, screen wouldn't come back on. At the same time, I kept getting "SD Card Present" notification.I panicked and thought I had a bad phone, a bit of googling, and someone suggested deleting the cache (Power off, turn on with power, vol up and home button pressed, when Android logo appears, let go of power, navigate to Delete Cache) - Did that, the phone started behaving - temporary relief, next day, same behavior again.Really started cursing my stars, more googling, there were suggestions the SD card slot had a hardware fault in the first batch, which was fixed in subsequent production runs. I downloaded a Samsung Hardware info app which indicated the phone was manufactured in Vietnam on 02/03/2016. This is too new to be an initial production run, so, I looked at the SD card itself, and found, it had corrupted. Plugged it into my laptop and tried to format it took about 2 hours and then failed at 80% complete. Plugged in another SD card (not new, old one, but formatted before inserting) and, every thing has been fine.I had also bought a Joylink tempered glass screen protector from Amazon, and whereas it looked very nice and fitted perfectly, I found after a while the touch sensitivity would go bonkers. This could be on a/c of the Galaxy VRS case (also from Amazon) I had put on, possibly lifting the tempered glass protector at the edges during use. I actually had a similar experience with the S6 edge last year. I think a GhostArmor or Zagg screen protector would go better with the edge contours than a hard glass protector, specially if you plan to keep the phone in a case.Samsung Galaxy S7 EDGE G935F 32GB Factory Unlocked GSM Smartphone International Version (Gold)
Do not buy this  international version phone because out here in New you it doesn't get the lte signal via t-mobile and to watch videos on YouTube you half to LOWER the resolution which defeats the purpose of the specs.. I've contacted Samsung and they state it's nothing they can do.. And tmoble as well.. This needs to be addressed.. Because it wasn't in the description and because of that I was miss lead into buying this crap
Excellent phone, I just wish it had all the band's of the phones so you can switch to any carrier like the nexus phones, and Samsung pay wish it had but I know because it's international it couldn't, but we'll made. :)
I highly recommend purchasing the 930U official unlocked version from Samsung directly. There is no warrantly on this model. I had to return it and thankfully Samsung officially released an unlocked version that works with WIFI Calling, 4G LTE and Samsung Pay. I previously had the S6 unlocked and it was an international version without warranty. It was hell and back to get the phone fixed. In fact, I ended up getting a new phone. I lost $700. The international version came directly from Samsung in Malaysia and they did not help. Please save yourself the trouble I faced and get the U.S unlocked version. Only buy from a reputable retailer.
The phone is amazing! the screen is simply the best on the market right now. I read different comments about unreliable sellers selling fake or refurbished phones.  I was lucky I bought mine from seller, theCoos. Got the phone new as described without problem.
Review for a US-based model from AT&T.This is my first review on AMZN after many years of being a customer.  I've had such an negative experience that it's necessary for other customers to be aware what they are getting into before they buy this device.  I switched to Samsung from Apple, and I regret the decision.Some of these devices have problems.  For example, problems with SD cards constantly being unmounted/remounted.  It's an annoying notification issue.  However, in my situation, I have a device that powers down completely, without warning, and will not restart until plugged into a charger.  This despite the battery being fully (or close to fully charged).  It's not due to misuse, lack of tech knowledge, etc.  It's about as serious an issue as can be--the device is absolutely unreliable and can die at any given moment.What customers should know about is the Samsung warranty process.  Support is based outside the US, and scripts are strictly adhered to.  Questions are asked over and over again; accurate notes are not taken.  "Floor supervisors" are not much more helpful that std. CSRs, and lack any authority to provide adequate solutions.  I spoke to no less that 3 different personnel, 2 of them supervisors, and each provided a different story regarding the amount of time it takes to turn around repairs.  It varied from 10 business day in repair (plus 4 days shipping back an forth), to the best offer being overnight shipping both ways plus 3 business days in their repair facility.  Thus, if your Samsung device breaks, you can be without a device for up to 7 days (5 business days and a weekend).  They offer no loaner devices, no cross-shipped devices, and will refer you to your carrier to help you.  There's apparently no formal relationship between Samsung and AT&T regarding loaner devices; even though the broken device is Samsung's issue they will tell you to get a loaner device from family/friends or to ask your carrier.  Why would I ask my carrier to help me with an issue that belongs to Samsung?Because I've had very, very few issues with Apple devices, I've not had to seek repairs often.  When I have, it's a matter of a trip to the Genius Bar and refurbs are typically provided.  Appointments at the Genius Bar can be tight but at least you walk out with a functioning device.The moral of the story, in my situation at least, is that Samsung hardware support is less-than-stellar.  Had I not escalated my issue I would have likely been without a phone for about 2 weeks.  After an hour+ of frustrating conversations I cut that in about half.  Just be aware if your S7 Edge is malfunctioning you'll likely be without a phone for a lengthy period of time.  If you use your device for business (and even if you do not!) such a turnaround time is unacceptable.
The best phone you will ever have, can handle many applications in background and it still responds as expected, zero lags and the curved screen is the best.The phone came with the AC adaptor as it's for Africa but I had no problems at all, the quick charge is just amazing and the battery lasts the whole day (5am to 11pm) with no need to additional battery charges.Go for the gold version it's the most classy one. Some photos that I took they look so real. Enjoy!
Love this phone. Super fast. Screen is nice and big. Loaded with a bunch of great features.I connected it with cricket. Only 55 a month get great signal (cricket uses att towers)So i get nice fast connection with a low monthly cellphone bill.
very great phone i was abit worried when i ordered this but after recieving it using it i love it allot just some buyers know that with some carriers when u goto activate ur signal may just say 4g or lte or 4glte depends on where u r and ur carrier as for mine i have at&t usa and my signal says 4g i was hoping it would say 4glte maybe over time it will i dunno
This phone is definitely one of the fastest on the market at the moment. I have dropped it several times on hard floors, and there is no visible damage at all. I have also handled it with wet hands, and it still works flawlessly. Although, the fingerprint scanner doesn't get along with water drips. The edge screen is a great addition, and I have gotten use out of the news feature when the phone is locked. The battery life is great, since it lasts about a day with moderate to heavy use.Also, for those who are wondering, this model supports most LTE bands, and it is also supported by most GSM carriers. I use it with Metro PCS, and it works perfectly.
Amazing unlocked phone!  Currently using it in Mexico with a prepaid ATT Sim card and everything is great!  Very high quality photos in front and in the back of the phone.  The metal finish is very high quality!  Love it!
I was nervous about purchasing an international version of this phone but I'm happy I did. I actually owned a US AT&T version prior to this model and I can confirm the following after several days of use and testing:1) The International version has the faster Exynos 8890 vs Snapdragon 820.2) Battery life appears to be better than the Snapdragon 820 US model.3) No problems with AT&T LTE 4G.4) No AT&T bloatware!So far I highly recommend it!
First of all, this product came delayed in shipping. One week late to be exact.Second, the cable charger usb that comes with the product is missing a line, slowing down my charging. Another small issue is that the charger plug is big and doesn't fit in most power extension cords.There is also a small heating problem with the phone when using it to play games or for long periods of time.For my personal preferences, I dislike the phone because all the buttons are very sensitive; even the power and volume buttons are sensitive and easy to press on.
Factory seal was open and phone appears to be tampered with. Not sure if phone is a genuine Samsung phone or a knock off. Also weird software installed on phone as well. Not sure what else is installed. Will be returning ASAP.
USB port corroded and stopped working in 15 days.I have never fully submerged the phone, but did take it out in very light rain a couple of time to get some pictures.  It started warning me about having moisture in the port when I plugged it in to charge.  I left it unplugged for several hours and then left it plugged in to charge once the warning went away.  I came back several hours later to find that it had a message saying it was overheated and had shut itself down.  I turned it on and it would no longer charge.  I took it to my local cell phone store and they said the USB port and headphone jack were corroded and they wouldn't return the phone, saying it was physical damage.Given all of the Samsung advertising showing WAY worse things happening to phones (submerge in fish tank, poor champagne on it, etc, etc) this feels like deceptive advertising. I am hoping to find a class action lawyer.
I live in the UK, but had this delivered to a friend's address while I completed a road trip from Miami to San Francisco.  The delivered product was well packaged and was originally intended for the Middle East market.  A big bonus for me is that the supplied charger uses a UK-style 3-pin plug.  While hardly a big deal as I, like most people, have the world's supply of USB power adapters.  Considering that this purchase has saved me quite a bit of cash over outright purchase in the UK, I'm very happy.Powering up the phone for the first time shows a single application for the intended market which was deleted as I have no use for it.  I've owned Android phones previously, but have been using an iPhone 6 Plus for the last year.  I've since fallen out of love with iOS as it's just too inflexible and is becoming somewhat childish in terms of interface.  Samsung's implementation of the Android platform is smooth, highly-polished and commendable.  It's not as fast as the pure product in the Nexus lineup, but does not suffer as all as a result.The octacore processor in the non-US model is just pure sweeping power.  It's a good thing that the battery is a hefty 3500mAh unit or it wouldn't last the day.  That said, if you're the kind of user who has multiple applications running all day long - and I'm among that userbase - this phone will take it all in its stride and not break a sweat.  The screen is absolutely beautiful without being too highly saturated, the cameras (both front and back) are immensely capable and the return of expandable storage through cheap and capacious micro-SD cards is very welcome.Physically, the phone is svelte, lightweight and sits in the hand beautifully.  Even without a case, there's no feeling that you'll drop it at any moment.  One of the finest physical features is the waterproofing that doesn't require that you slap chunks of rubber into the ports to maintain its integrity.  no more panics when you're caught in that torrential downpour about your phone suffering a premature demise.I haven't tried any of the included accessories such as the micro-USB cable, charger or earbuds as I already have very high quality 3rd-party versions.  From the look of them, they appear to be reasonable quality.For anyone in the US who's concerned about losing out on network connectivity by using a phone from an overseas market, rest assured.  I used a SIM card linked to T-Mobile's 4G network and had absolutely no issue anywhere with obtaining a good strong 4G signal.  The Exynos processor in the US market model, while likely perfectly adequate, will almost certainly be that touch slower than the beast in the overseas market product.If you're like me, fear running out of power when you're away out all day and carry a power bank, know that the quick charge 2 feature has this from about 5% to fully charged in around an hour.  The genuine Samsung quick charge puck may be slower to re-add the juice, but it's utterly convenient when you're a tired and then don't have to worry about not quite plugging the phone in to charge.If you're seeking to buy a phone without the burden of a contract, do yourself a big favour:  Save some money, get this model, use one of the probably five or six wall chargers you already have and enjoy this incredible handset.  It may be coming from outside of the US, but it's delivered quickly and I have no doubt whatsoever that it'll be loved every bit as I love mine.  This is the best phone I've ever had, and the added bonus of saving on the cost of purchasing outright through Best Buy, etc is the icing on an already very delicious cake.
I have been a Samsung Galaxy owner before, but decided to make a change to a phone that started good then got worst.I used to own the s3 and I'm glad I made a comeback to Samsung once again.The international version seems to be faster and have a longer battery life than the last phone I used to own. With one charge it'll last me all day, while on the other phone I had to recharged it when I got home from work.The graphics are amazing and I haven't had any glitches or problems with the phone so far.I did buy a screen protector and phone case since I seem to break phones quite easy.The screen itself seems to be scratch resistant.As for water resistant I can't say anything since I haven't used my phone in the water, I don't feel confident enough to drop my phone in the water or have it in the shower.This is so far the best phone I've owned, it does not heat up as bad as my other phone and it has an elegant view.
Got the phone from the store and I was told the otterbox I got for it would protect my phone well less than 24 hrs my screen shattered after 1 drop less than a foot. I love that it's fast and it keeps a charge 20 times longer than my lg3 but once you drop it once it will shatter I wish I had done my homework before getting a phone known to shatter and the fact that ALL the cases for it don't keep the screen from shattering. Now an owner of a shattered new phone
The phones features are great. The only thing is that... I've had the phone for a week and not dropped it once. Today the phone cracked when I dropped it... I was sitting on the floor when it slipped from my hand less than a foot up and the entire screen cracked. This material that it's made from is terribly fragile.
Greatest phone ever.I have used it for 9 days already and it's awesome.My only complaint is the lack of good glass screen protectors.First off the camera,it's awesome,although it's pretty similar to the S6.I wish they stayed at 16mp as it was 16:9 but otherwise, its great.It even has a wider angle,when zooming it had a tiny bit better quality than the S6 and autofocus is extremely fast.Low light was obviously insaneThe battery, this was one of my main concern with my S6 and the S7E battery is very good.The first days which tend to be pretty bad for battery life, where surprisingly good.I even had to drain it's battery sometimes.But to be honest it perfomed a bit worse than I expected, i mean, it's waaay better than the S6,but as a student I thought it would last me a bit more.I read articles on people saying they used their phone heavily and ended the day at 11:30 with 20 percent battery life(that was using bluetooth,nfc,location and wifi/lte on as they said) and in my experience, I have finished days with 35% battery from 7am to 11pm but only using either wifi or mobile data,no bluetooth or nfc,no location services on.So I think mi phone's battery is stabilizing yet(if someone can tell me if im right say it please!).As a student, I don't use my phone for long periods from 7 to 4pm.Maybe 15 min intervals or 30 minutes using gallery for photos,what really surprised me is that battery drained pretty fast sometimes and sometimes it almost didn't drain,which is weird.That's why I think it may be normal for the fist weeks(again,correct me if i'm wrong)BTW, I don't use powersaving,which I did on the s6 alwaysPower wise, It's an extremely powerful phone which can manage literally anything,and there's no lag with power saving on or off.There's not much to say.The phone is a bit bigger than the s6 and s6 edge.I strongly recommend it
I received this phone yesterday and instantly fell in love with it. I have owned several Galaxy phones (s3, s4, s4 active, and s5). So far I love it! It came sealed in the original box. I cannot use the charger adapter that came with it, but I expected that as it's an international version.I picked the gold color, it looks and feels elegant and sleek. I love the interface, the phone itself is super fast. The phone has a big, beautifully bright screen. I am still getting used to its size. The fingerprint scanner is noticeably better than that of the gs5. Both cameras take amazing pictures.I am one of those people that are constantly on their phones during most of the day. It has an excellent battery life and charges very fast.I did read a couple reviews where people complained about the phone slipping out of their hands. I have used an Otterbox Symmetry Series case since I took it out of the box and have not had that problem at all.My only complaint about this phone is that it does not have an IR blaster, but I can live with that.I will update my review in the future if anything changes.UPDATE:I have been using this phone for about a month now and it is still just as amazing as when I took it out of the box. It still has amazing battery life. I have a Pocket Juice power bank that I was using around noon every day with my Gs5 but I have not used it at all with this phone. It usually still has 15% after about 12 hours of use.I have not had any lagging or random restarts like I did with my Gs5. The phone is still amazingly fast and responsive.I have slightly tested the waterproofing of this phone. The fingerprint scanner does not work well when wet, but the touch screen is still responsive.I have a Otterbox Symmetry Series case that I use with this phone and I have noticed that it causes the Zagg Dry screen protector to bubble up around the edges (I would like to state that I did NOT allow the protector 24 hours to "cure" after applying before putting the case back on, so that could be the reason.) I have heard that with the edges it is hard to find a case/screen protector combination that doesn't cause bubbling at the edges.Overall I would definitely recommend this phone.
Love my phone, but I wish they came out with a bigger internal memory. Can't store the downloaded Amazon Videos on the external memory. So I can only keep a few movies then delete them after watching it. I don't want to steam videos or it will eat my data, and I'm not at a Wi-Fi hotspot all the time. That so far is the downside. Also, my phone did freeze once, but I was able to hard boot it by holding down the power button and the volume up and down button at the same time for a few seconds.
I bought this right after my iPhone decided to stop working which was this past Saturday and I'm not disappointed. It's definitely bigger than the iPhone 6 so sometimes it feels like I can't hold it right..The battery life is amazing, great camera - Def different than a iPhone camera, great screen size and colorI have Cricket Wireless as my network and it's working great,BTW that company has the same signal as AT&T, but sometimes I have to resend texts several times, it's gotten annoying. Idk if that's a phone thing or provider issue?My last android was the galaxy S3 now to the S7 Edge, incredible improvement
I bought SG S7 six months ago, so I've had enough time to play with it. On the positive side, the phone is not that big, it's light, has an excellent design, decent -not great- battery life. Takes good photos and videos, and the VR headset is a nice bonus, but a technology still being developed. Now, even with 4GB of RAM, and the Snapdragon 820 or Exynos CPU, Android is SLOW!, yes the phone feels sluggish, it tends to get stucked loading or switching apps or different tasks. Some people say it's not Android's fault, but Samsung's, because of the bloatware put in Galaxy phones. So either way, to get a faster, better experience with Android, you have to look somewhere else. Even though there are apps to take advantage of the edge screen, it's mostly a gimmick. Last, even tough it's great to have this screen resolution (1440 x 2560 pixels), it's not adequate for the size of the screen, which also has been narrowed from previous models. Most of the time you will find yourself having a hard time trying to click a link, or any option available. The microsd card option is nice, but it's located on the same slot of the SIM card, so you must be careful taking it out, because it can get corrupted, and you end up losing your data (photos, videos, music, docs, etc).
As soon as i got this i have yet to put it down, SUPER FAST, AMAZING SCREEN, its the dream phone i have been waiting for. Easy to transfer my data to the new phone, very thing and light, when i first held it i was like "omg this thing is super light" like i would drop it forgetting about the weight of it lol Only thing i was "eh" on about getting it was the seal was detached from the box(wasn't broken but the adhesive was rubbed off from shipping/warehouse), and the branding that usually says "S7 Edge" on the back is not on this model which i think is a good thing but made me feel for about an hour "man i got a fake" but it was not the case at all, it felt like the real deal. I checked the settings and the software is super snappy and easy to use, in the "about phone" section of settings it does say model number and the phone type as what it was advertised.PRO:~Amazing screen~Great build~Wireless Charging/Water Resistant(i have tried the water resistance and i say it works, had residue from the stickers and so i ran under tap water and cleaned that right off)(i have yet to try wireless charging yet)NEUTRAL:~Battery(it seems great but at the same time not so great. I woke up at 7am with 100% and then by 8:45am its at 85% so i still great but i feel by the end of the night ill have 10% left or less. I am a heavy user when it comes to my phone)CON:~Charger it comes with is foreign(my seller gave me an adapter with my phone, but i don't know if that's every purchase so be well aware it MAY NOT come with an American Adapter)As far as i can tell that's about it so far, i will update my review when and if anything changes. Yet to test wireless charging but plan on picking one up soon and will add an edit to this.
I have had this phone for about a month now.  It worked good until recently when I started getting grey bars across the screen.  I bought this because of the water resistance, but if I could do it over, I would get a different brand.This grey bar problem seems to be a common problem in the galaxy S7.
I upgraded from a Galaxy S4 and am absolutely Amazed by this phone. It can go for over two days before charging. It has none of the typical bloatware. It's supposedly waterproof but I don't plan on testing that on purpose. It's painful to have to pay the full price up front but it's worth it to not be at the mercy of your cell phone provider. I will never buy a locked cell phone from a cell phone provider again. I'm glad they brought back the SD memory slot, but I wish it had a removable battery. Other than that, I think the Galaxy S7 is one of the best phones on the market at this time.
DON'T BE STUPID...like me and the others that paid $700 for a paper weight. Samsung quality has went down the toilet. Mine is dead and there is no warranty when you buy an international version of this phone. I've tried all of the "fixes" and it's still dead. I've never had a problem with any of my previous Samsung phones but this one has well known inherent problems. If you want to still buy one, I get it, I really liked mine. Just be sure to spend the little extra and get it from a reputable USA verified retailer of USA market phones. Consider the few extra dollars spent as the cheapest extended warranty you'll ever buy.
The build quality is excellent, on par with Apples external build quality.This devices edge design makes looking at the screen much more interesting, and less "flat". It is similar to looking into a slight bubble. The buttons are very tactile, and the fingerprint sensor and it's controlling software work well.Samsung's TouchWiz implementation on top of Android 6.0.1 raises no real complaint from me. I do not use their "Edge UI", but it can be fully disabled easily.
SAMSUNG IS NOW SELLING US MODEL UNLOCKED 935U unlocked S7 phones $769 (do not get ripped off) direct from Samsung also at other retailers (best buy, BH photo for same price). Samsung website will give you a list if you type 935 U in the search line. Samsung has defied the big carriers in the US by doing this to give Americans the choice that Europeans have had for years; the ability to switch back and forth with mobile carriers.  I have a galaxy S6 sm-G925F.  Love the phone BUT I upgraded from an S4 specifically to get Samsung pay and the better camera.  I am a tech person, love gadgets and I am a research person. My S4 was an international version so I already knew NO USA registration. I registered online with Samsung UK London and bought a square Trade warranty. Registering UK meant I would have to send the phone to London for service but I would have live chat tech service if needed. They told me about no Samsung pay on the F variant yet. I switched to straight talk a few years ago (really good decision) I bought my first phone from them it was a Samsung. That phone made me a convert from apple to Android.  When I received my S6 international variant F I tried to get Samsung pay no app. Called Samsung USA and when I gave my model number with the F I was told this is an international varient and can not be registered with Samsung US nor would it get Samsung Pay and it still does not.  I like my phone a lot and until this US version came out had no intention of getting a new phone for a couple of years but I want to support Samsung in this move to break the hold of big carriers on American consumers. Which is why I am writing this review.
ordered the product from Nigeria and i got it in record time.  My wife so far has no complaint about the phone. All in all it's a fantastic experience from the timely delivery to the phone performance.
Got it from a local store and I loved the phone! The edge design is unique and appealing. Much better batter life and overall performance is great.. Not sure what's not there to like in the phone..Hope to use it for a long time
Good phone, but has problems:1. Fragile screen. Dropped from a chair height and cracked. Very expensive replacement.2. Sound interruptions after a second. Especially bad for alarms. Not often but still annoying.3. Curved screen is easy to touch by accident.
I love this phone! My hubby and I both got on on this past Friday from our local Verizon store. I have the gold and he has the silver.Pros-Slight built in protection from falls as the edges are curved.Both of the cameras are amazing. The front facing camera has a few modes that you can you and there is a sensor on the back by the camera and you can tap it so it takes the photo. The rear facing camera is amazing and you can zoom in without the blurriness that other phone cameras have when you do. Also it has a lot of different modes. One of my favorite is slow motion! Capture those really amazing moments that other cameras are way to slown to capture!The battery life is super amazing. I do not want to charge it over night because I do not want to over charge it. I woke up after playing it a lot yesterday. And I used it a nice amount this morning between calling texting and looking up things on chrome. It started on 54% and roughly 13.5 HOURS later it was down to 25%. It charges amazingly fast 30 minutes it was back up to 91%
Exceptional quality and all around beautiful, however- the way it's configured, system wise. It becomes difficult to figure out how to navigate and find the way to correctly install some apps without an actual 'owners book/manual (not included.oh, it's on the phone itself ) had to go to 'you tube' to watch a video's in order to understand on how to do so. PAIN IN THE ASS, I must say. Also very difficult to get/find an exceptable screen cover/shield that fits correctly, so far the one's i've tride won't adhere to the surface, the way the phone edge curves. Anyways.......
Flawless speed and functioning.  Everything on this phone is seamless and easy to use. If transferring from a previous Samsung it is even easier. They put the external memory option back on this phone too. Battery life is extraordinary.
Marvellous phone! Just as expected. Arrived some days late but I'm sure it was because the company ships all their orders in an specific date and that's why they offer several days or hours to order for the Prime Shipping. The first day I used it, It overheated A LOT, I was worried because I didn't want to return it after all the days I waited and the complication of waiting again for another one. But i searched the problem up and its normal for it to occur the first day, its setting up anyways, first day of startup. Until now, I've had it for about 2 months. The S7 Edge, exceeds expectations. Runs games smoothly and fast! The ability to switch apps and for them to stiill be active is amazing. Great phone, I'll update this soon with more information on how I'm doing with it.
Pros: +AMAZING CAMERA AND SCREEN! I mean Amazing!!! some of the pictures i've taken with it are like something you see on a stock phone wallpaper! just stunning!Ready? Cons:- Gets Hot too fast!- So much bloatware that you can't remove- Slippery as all hell. It's like having a wet fish in your hands.- I do not like the edge screen. It gets in the way. I skip videos by accident, close and open apps, just do things i don't mean to do. I'm never going to get an edge screen again! looks cool, but for me it's impractical and unnecessary.- Terrible location for the volume buttons.-home screen and recent app buttons are reversed. If you're coming from HTC or LG or anything beside Samsung it will take some time to get used to.
I've owned and used several types of phones: a flip-phone, a Blackberry, a Palm Treo, an iPhone, a Palm Pre, a Galaxy S4. This is the only phone I actually regret buying. I find the very thin edges make the phone hard to hold securely, which is a constant annoyance. Putting it in a case helped a bit. But a month after I bought it, I dropped the phone about eight inches onto a tile floor, while in the case, and the screen got cracked. Not one crack, but lots of them. Since there are plenty of businesses that fix phone and tablet screens these days, I went looking for a repair. I discovered just one place that would repair this model, and they charge $250 to do it. I think the odd rounded screen edges make a repair more difficult and more expensive. My advice: Skip the cool rounded screen, and get something more traditional, more sturdy, and easier to repair.
Phones been great after 3 months and 3 countries.  Battery life is incredible as I work and travel at the same time and I still can't get it to die in one day (I'm not a heavy video consumer on my phone.)  I've taken thousands of photos and they are all of incredible quality.  Faster charger is the best and will fully charged in roughly 90 minutes.The only negative thing about this phone is that if you don't have a case, it's hard to use because the sides of your hands will touch the edge screen.  It's difficult for me to use this phone without a case.  I'd love to just hold this thing without a case because it's SO thin but the edge actually makes it harder to navigate.
I bought this phone one week ago... I have no idea why there're some black stripes on my screen. When I increase the light, it's smaller...
The Q&A said this comes with a US power adapter. Mine did not. I got the German pin-type power connector without any adapters for the US.
Great device with so much to offer. I recommend buying from the seller, "Mobiles International LLC." They sent a new and reliable device and honored a warranty for a defective product on Samsung's behalf. :)
Love the phone I bought (black onyx). Works very well. Great camera, great screen sensitvity and charges quickly. The only downside is that I have to use a converter with the fast charging cord. I find it cumbersome although it works well. I guess it was made for a British market.
If your LTE is not working on AT&T on this phone, you need to tell them to keep your old phone's IMEI in their system instead of putting the edge's IMEI in there. If you put the edge's IMEI in their system, for some dumb reason their system won't recognize the phone because it's international, and the system will automatically provision you down to 3G only. Also europe's 4G logo doesn't say "LTE", the logo just says 4G but it is in fact 4G LTE, just FYI. For more than a day I thought I was going to have to return this because I wasn't getting LTE, then I went to a different store the next day where I figured out to keep my old phone's IMEI in the system so I could get LTE on the international edge.I have had the phone for 4 weeks now I think, zero problems so far, nothing was wrong with the packaging. My edge came from Italy. Purchased from vendor "Wireless Everything", thank you.
I have just got the phone and I am very happy with the quality so far. Great camera, fast processing. Compatible with an AT&T Go Phone SIM card. I will update this review once I try inserting an international SIM card as well.
International phones can not be repaired in the US. Despite the cost of this phone, it is a piece of crap. Samsung customer support will not help. LCD problem in less than 3 months with minimal use, and NO damage. Not even a scratch on the phone, yet it is almost useless. There are smart phones selling for $10.00. This one cost me $850.00 and did not last long. BUYER BEWARE.
I love this phone, dual sim as promised. Very sleek and not bulky at all. Setup was a bit wonky for me but I was lucky the guys at ATT were able to fix it. However, it doesn't work with Samsung Pay which is available in the US but I don't mind that.
Till now  is very good, and I have it for 2 weeks. But I hope to be the same because I have a friend who had the same phone and her display was buried after one month and I heard that other people had the same problem
I broke my old s6 edge +, and got a good deal on this in Dubai. I love the dual sim option (not sure if that is available on all versions, but it is on the one I have) since it makes having sims from two countries so much easier. The phone is a little thicker than the s6 edge pus, and the screen is smaller, but it also feels much better to hold it in your hand. Performance wise I haven't noticed a difference from my old s6, though the camera is much better.
I got the exynos version. The phone works great. The phone is fast in switching between app and windows. The edge panel can be very useful if u arrange it to your need.Two best thing: the screen is wonderful - vivid colors very high brightness, one of the best screen by far; the battery - so powerful, i can use my phone for all day and the battery will not dead.Overall i am very-very satisfied with my s7 edge.
I'm really liking this phone. To be fair this is my first flagship phone. I'm coming from a cheap Nokia Lumia 520 but figured for once I'd splurge and see what all the fuss is about on these top tier phones.The first thing I noticed is that the screen is absolutely beautiful. I couldn't get over how clear and lifelike everything looked. Also being able to actually see my phone's screen in the sun was a definite plus haha. OLED is just an awesome technology and I can't wait until TV manufacturers tweak the picture processing a bit. Just a great display.I haven't run benchmarks or anything but everything on the phone is very snappy. Going into the camera, opening/switching apps, playing games, watching movies, etc. all ran smoothly. I didn't notice any warmth or the phone running hot but that probably due to using a case. The call quality was fine and overall I'm really enjoying it.On the down side, I think the phone's a little awkward to hold or picking up from a flat surface. I got this case Galaxy S7 Edge Case, SUPCASE Full-body Rugged Holster Case WITHOUT Built-in Screen Protector for Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge (2016 Release), Unicorn Beetle PRO Series - Retail Package (Black/Black) and the rubber edges made a world of difference. It's no longer slippery and easy to pick up off of a flat surface. Nothing worse than paying for a phone like this only to drop it while trying to set it up!The only thing I'm hoping is that the battery lasts quite a long time. Not having easy access to it is kind of a bummer. As I just dropped nearly $750 on it and I don't upgrade phones every year I'm hoping it lasts awhile. As much as I really do like this phone I don't think I'll be spending this much on a phone again. The purchase was more to quell my curiosity about these high end phones so I can check that off my bucket list hahaI purchased the phone from Wireless Everything and it arrived brand new in a sealed box with all new components. I popped my SIM card in and I was off to the races. I never purchased an international phone so was a bit nervous but everything went extremely well. If you're looking for a cheaper alternative I would suggest the OnePlus3 or ZTE Axon 7. Very similar specs for 400 smackaroos.
Great phone, everything looks nice, thank you. I'll be testing it and let everybody know how it goes. But so far it's awesome.It's been a while now and in gotta say this phone is fantastic. I've had a galaxy phone since the G-S2 till this one and believe me, this one is by far the phone I've ever had. Yes it can improve for example, the back cover would be great in aluminum (kinda like iphone) it'll prevent from cracking in minor accidents. The speakers can always be louder I guess. Oh yeah I forgot, the battery... Omg is the best thing ever, thank you Samsung you did great.
The Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge is a great device. I have not been this excited by a device in years. It's has a 12mp camera that is the best on the market. The design is ultra premium and feels great in hand. It is also waterproof, and I tested in a pool with no issues. The return on the micro sd card leave you with plenty of space for music, videos, and movies. The new processor is blazing fast with no lag. The battery is the best I have ever had on any device with this phone I can get a day and a half of battery life. If you looking for a great phone pick up a Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge.
Be wary of the Edge phones.  My husband dropped his from about 1 foot and the screen shattered.  I have heard about this happening with other Samsung Edge products, but I have had so many phones and not once have the screens cracked so I thought I would be fine.  I was wrong.  I should have listened to others.
This is without a single doubt, the best smart phone on the market. I have played with the LG G5 and the HTC 10, and I can tell you neither are in the class of the S7, and especially not the S7 Edge Exynos version. The Exynos version has better battery life than the Snapdragon 820 version, and it does a much, much, much better job with power and memory management. The white one is my favorite, and I had to look high and low to find one. But I have it now, and it's very cool to have what almost nobody else has. Great phone! It's stylish, well built, beautifully sculpted with the best screen in the industry. Even touchwiz is light, fast and smooth. This phone has ZERO lag. Everything's better on the Edge. And don't let people tell you that the edge feature is gimmicky. It is EXACTLY what you make it. If you don't spend a minute learning what it can do, it will do little for you. But, if you decide to learn all of its features, and employ them fully, this feature can be one of the best on the device. I also didn't find it useful at first, because I allowed all of the reviewers to influence me that it is just a gimmick. But then I watched a review where the guy really laid out what it could actually do, and decided to look into it further. In the end, I have found it to be a vital part of my functions on this phone. So if you are part of the "too lazy to discover" generation, then you might not find it useful. But if you want to get all you can out of this device, it can become vital.One last thing, get a case for this phone immediately. The biggest drawback of this device is that if you break it, the waterproofing is gone, even after repair.
This phone is AMAZING. The display is gorgeous, it takes some time to get used but it totally worth it. This phone works great in argentina's network and i am having a pretty rough time trying to kill the battery it just doesn't want to give up.
I'm not one who generally uses my phone. I'm a pay-as-you-go type of person. I use my phone for calls and texts. I see no need to pay extra for internet with the number of places with free wifi. My last phone was the Samsung Gravity, so this was a large step for me. For my needs, this phone is extremely oversized... with that being said, the display size makes it great for other things. I try to use my phone minimally. I use apps for the weather because I own a convertible and love the beach. I also chat with some friends using LINE. I was holding out for the 64GB version, but didn't see any availability for it and needed the phone for work... so I can download and read email... and chat using Lync/Skype.PROS- 12 MP camera for nice crisp pics.- excellent display for viewing photos and movies- extremely fast and smooth opening and switching apps. I notice no lag whatsoever.- expandable storage- battery can last me two daysCONS- size- easy to accidentally press button on sides- internal memory options for the U.S.- color choices by cell phone carrierIf there is one regret, it's that I wish I had bought the dual sim version just in case I wanted two carriers so I can maintain my grandfathered price plan and still pay separately for wifi should I ever need it.
At first I gave this 5 stars. Now I'm giving it one because it has a vertical pink line going up and down the phone. I spent a crap load of money on this phone for it to be doing this. I will give it 5 stars again once the problem is fixed or phone is replaced
This screen is so brittle its unbelievable. I've cracked 1 screen in the past 10 years and I've cracked this screen in 3 seperate places in less than 6 months. The curved edges just scream "hit me" on even drops as low as 1-2 feet.Plus you cannot operate this phone without bumping the edges of the touch screen and messing up whatever you're typing. Really frustrating
Stunning display. Impressive 5.5 quad -HD screen shows crisp colors from various angles. Best screen on any smart phone.Beautiful curved design is an eye-candy.Camera is not 12 megapixels and superior to S6 and iPhone. Auto-focus is also has great speed leaving others in dust.Large 3600mAh battery is like having a phone + battery case without actually having the thick battery case. Hard to kill that battery in a day.Always on mode constantly displays notifications without the need to unlock the phone.Water resistant. IP68 rated which means the phone can be totally submerged in water up to 1mt deep and 30 minutes.Micro SD expandable memoryAgain, the battery is so good.
Amazing phone, don't know what to tell, one of the best in the world right now. The selller is very good, I ordered 2 of this.. and they are awesome..I tried it in water, battery is amazing. I am glad that I bought this one.. Thanks :)
It is perfect this phone . First time that I bought a phone online and I had a very good experience . It's in very good condition and I got the phone next day . The only thing it's that on the back doesn't say "galaxy s7 edge"
Oh, another year 2016. Another set of phones from manufacturers! I have been hooked onto get the latest phone every year syndrome and love reviewing specifics. Disclaimer, I love Android and have been using from very early days. Samsung Galaxy S7 still is evolutionary. If you have an older phone more than 2 years old, absolutely get this. So do check local specs. I played around with both S7 and S7 Edge for few days and my opinions are based on this. There are tons of reviews going into lot of details, so I am focused on few other aspects like what’s out there and how to compare specs. Overall S7 and S7 were very slick. If I have to make a choice between S7 and G5, I will slightly lean towards G5 but both are fantastic!First Big Changes: microSD is back. And back with a vengeance 200 GB. I love it, and have been using it in my current LG as well.  Unfortunately, the battery is non-removable, has not been addressed. The only flagship to feature a removable battery so far this year is the LG G5. I know many of you loyal Samsung fans says BUMMER! I was a diehard fan of Samsung till S4, then I went to LG G2/G3. I was very curious to try out S7 as they are most talked about now. Why did I love it?! Screen is a beauty on S6 – Just Gorgeous. Just go to a retail store and feel it!The Edge feature is still gimmicky. I think it will fold into regular phones at some point. It is certainly fancy and nice to show off, but I would rather buy an Android wear watch like Motorola 360 or Samsung Gear or LG R series.IF YOU HAVE LAST YEAR model of any phone, PLEASE DON’T upgrade. Phones are becoming so standard and power packed it makes no sense to upgrade and waste money every year. I buy and sell so many phones as it is like a hobby for me, but I stick to one phone as primary for couple of years now. My main requirements are a 200 GB microSD, good screen, battery life and performance. I am trying hard to see if I can live without one.In my opinion, following are key specs to consider when you buying a phone. Most of others are standard or does not matter at all. First size, weight and resolution are part of look and feel. RAM/CPU part of performance. External Storage is part of expandability. Camera is obvious! SAR (Specific Absorption Rating) is an often ignored, but I feel essential to making a buying choice. Manufacturers don’t advertise or mention SAR prominently.phone parameters: {size, weight, resolution, ppi, RAM, ext Storage, camera, CPU, USA SAR rating}Samsung Galaxy S7: 5.61 x 2.74 x 0.31 in, 152 gm, 1440 x 2560 pixels, 5.1 in, 577 ppi, 4 GB RAM, YES MICROSD SLOT (GOOD!), Internal Storage upto 128 GB, Exynos 7420 Quad-core 1.5 GHz Cortex-A53 & Quad-core 2.1 GHz Cortex-A57, Gorilla Glass 4, 16 MP/5MP camera, SAR 1.40 W/kg (head)  1.59 W/kg (body)  NANO SIMSamsung Galaxy S6: 5.65 x 2.78 x 0.27 in, 138 gm, 1440 x 2560 pixels, 5.1 in, 577 ppi, 3 GB RAM, NO MICROSD SLOT upto 200 GB (bummer), Internal Storage upto 64 GB, Qualcomm MSM8996 Snapdragon 820/Exynos 8890 Octa, Gorilla Glass 4, 16 MP/5MP camera, SAR 1.15 W/kg (head), 1.16 W/kg (body) NANO SIMSamsung Galaxy S6 Edge: Slightly lower dimensions, 0.01 in thicker, 6 gm less weight, Same resolution, Curved Screen,HTC One M9: 5.69 x 2.74 x 0.38 in, 157 gm, 1080 x 1920 pixels, 5 in, 441 ppi, 3 GB RAM, microSD upto 128 GB!, 20.7 MP (rear), 4 MP(front for selfies), Qualcomm Snapdragon 810, Quad-core 1.5 GHz Cortex-A53 & Quad-core 2 GHz Cortex-A57LG G5: 5.88 x 2.91 x 0.30 in, 159 gm, 2560 x 1440 pixels, 5.3 in, 554 ppi, 4 GB RAM, microSD upto 200 GB, 16 MP/8 MP, Dual-core 2.15 GHz Kryo & dual-core 1.6 GHz Kryo - H850, Quad-core Cortex-A72 & quad-core Cortex-A53 - H840 , xx W/kg (head), yy W/kg (body) (unknown at the time of writing) Nano SIMGoogle Nexus 6: 6.27 x 3.27 x 0.60 in, 184 gm, 2560 x 1440 pixels, 5.96 in, 493 ppi, 3 GB RAM, no ext Storage, 13 MP/2 MP, Qualcomm Snapdragon 805, Quad-core 2.7 GHz Krait 450, Adreno 420, 1.47 W/kg (head), 0.93 W/kg (body)Apple iPhone 6 PLUS: 6.22 x 3.06 x 0.288 in, 172 gm, 1920 x 1080 pixels, 5.5 in, 401 ppi, 1 GB RAM, no ext storage, 8 MP/1.2 MP, Apple A7, Dual-core 1.3 GHz Cyclone (ARM v8-based), 1.12 W/kg (head), 1.18 W/kg (body)Samsung Galaxy Note 4 N910: 6.04 x 3.09 x 0.33 in, 176 gm, 2560 x 1440 pixels, 5.7 in, 515 ppi, 3 GB RAM, micro SD upto `128 GB, 16 MP/3.7MP, Exynos 5 Octa 5420, Quad-core 1.9 GHz Cortex-A15 & quad-core 1.3 GHz Cortex-A7, SAR: 0.37 W/kg (head), 0.88 W/kg (body)Amazon Kindle Fire: 5.5” x 2.6” x 0.35”, 160 g, 1280 x 720 pixels, 4.7”, 315 ppi, 2 GB RAM, 32 GB, no microSD, 2.2GHz Quad-core Snapdragon 800 CPU, with Adreno 330 GPU, nanoSIM, SAR: 1.34 watts/kgGiven the above key specs, my suggestion to my friends is to choose 2 or 3 KEY features you require (may be large screen size, maybe less weight, maybe more CPU power) and then start nailing down the phones. Definitely and definitely go to a phone or a big box store and feel the phone. Nothing replaces that. In the end you are using it for days and years, so the tactile feel is very important. I have used all these phones and at a high level they are all good. Few things here and there. And yes the cost. If you are in for a new smartphone and has a budget issue, GET LAST YEAR MODEL. They are as good as current year and probably half the cost! In this case I even suggest Galaxy S4 as it is an outstanding phone. It’s much cheaper and you will be happy!!SCREEN SIZE/RESOLUTION:I have experimented with many phone sizes and I have come to a conclusion 5” is the best form factor for me. Your mileage may vary, The display is absolutely stunning with a Quad HD screen and you have to see to feel it.ANDROID UI:S7 has Android OS v6.0 (Marshmallow)out of the box. User Interface has a flatter and simpler design, as is now the trend across the industry. Once you get used to user interface you get used to it. Android is very flexible and when I show my phone to a iPhone users they are usually in awe. I recently showed to my friends the details of processes. Battery usage like which process takes up more battery.S-Health is a big deal, the app is beautiful and the heart rate and oxygen level measurements are great to keep track. I use Runtastic Pro and Nike+, but like the UI of S-Health too.CAMERA:Fantastic camera. One of the best smartphone cameras. Period.PROCESSING POWER:Don’t bother about it. For 99% of users, this is good enough. The phone has more processing power than the rocket that went to moon first time and much more. The games are very smooth, the UI is very smooth.NFC Tags:Wow, this is the most underrated in all reviews. I use AndroidPay constantly. I use it in WholeFoods and it is so easy. I have used at Walgreens too. Get bunch ( I mean around 10) of NFC Tags and use in bedrooms, offices, cars, living room and customize what your phone wants to do in those areas. For example, when I enter the car most often I use a) Navigation b) Listen to Podcasts. So I program my NFC tags accordingly using apps like Trigger and tap my phone to the NFC Tag and boom, phone does both.BATTERY:Do you really need to care for battery anymore. I don’t. Just use the phone. I have battery power banks with capacity as high as 30,000 mAh to 8000 mAh that I can charge virtually anywhere without a power supply. So this has become moot for me in past year. I would also suggest you get power banks and not really care of battery drainage. Use the phone and enjoy!To give a sample, I tried following apps and they just worked awesome.Amazon Mobile, Androidify, Aldiko Premium, Angry Birds (multiple themes), Asphalt 8, Box, Chrome, Android Pay, NAVIGON (from Garmin - offline maps), Nokia HERE Maps, Google Navigation/Earth/Maps, Google Drive, Ebay, Linkedin, Google Music, Tapatalk (awesome forum browsing app), Microsoft One Note (legacy docs, skydrive of 25 GB is good), Microsoft Office, (yes they have for Android!), Subsonic Music Streamer, TweetCaster Pro for Android (excellent twitter client), Twit.Tv, TriggerAsk questions. I will be glad to answer any questions within 24 hours.
The LCD on this phone stopped working, it flickers and goes black. it's been 12 days after the return policy ended and i can't do anything about it.I have bought a case and screen protector for this phone to protect it from day one.For the money i spent on this item, i should be able to resolve this issue. I bought this item through Amazon, a trustworthy website, to be able to resolve any issues without any hassle.Also, the fact that this does happen often, obviously there's a problem that needs to be resolved.
Yes. sick lookin phone. I saw couple of feedback that says fake phone or something fishy. In my case it was all good. And about the phone it's great! Nothing much added to s7 accept hardware improvement. Touch unlock is much much better then s6 generation. Great bettary life something aspect from Samsung. Not dissopointed at all.
Those black lines showed up from no where.  I don't know what is the problem . I would like to get an exchange please
The phone came brand new as I expected. Also came with a an adapter for the charging outlet. The phone runs as smooth as butter and the screen is downright amazing. Battery life has also been the best of any phone I've used. The camera is top of the line. I can't recommend this phone enough, it's gorgeous.
I really liked the product excellenge device lacked only send a gift, and the invoice for if you need to use the device's warranty. I need you to send me the invoice to need to use it.Thank you, Bruno.
I loved the phone. Firstly it works, there is no problem with the phone. It is fast and sharp. Screen is big and colorful. I love the curve part. With normal use (some social media, little talk, some music stream with bluetooth earphone it's battery goes for 2 days. If I play Pokemon, it goes 1.5 days
I already did wrote a awesome review for this phone, I even inspired myself like I was writing a poem and I gave 4 star to the phone but after 1 month and some days of use it started giving me problems, the phone restarts randomly out of nowhere, that has happened like 5 times and the then today I was just playing music and the lockscreen didn't work and the whole screen went black and none of the buttons were working to turn on the screen so I had it to do a massive restart, good thing it didn't erased all my stuff. I don't know if it has warranty or not but I'll be happy if I get my $850 back that I worked so hard.
Is a Korean version, works perfect in Agentina with 4g.LTE Claro network ..every thing goes find except por same apps and menues, that aperars in Korean..I disabed in order do not disturb. Upgrade also are working ok.
I had this case for about 3 weeks. Then somehow the plastic, gold piece, on the back, broke. When I got it, I automatically knew that the part may be fragile. I just never expected it to be that fragile. I love Caseology, but I just seriously want to get my money back and purchase a more durable case.
Updating my review.  I specifically ordered the LATAM version as I work in South America.  Constant connection drops and errors on my home network in Peru (Claro).  Claro has replaced my SIM twice and the problems still arise.  Couldn't connect in Ecuador on a standard GSM network that my S5 had connected to for years.  Guatemala, couldn't hold a connection either that my S5 had used for years as well.  I have a $700 top of the line network only device.  Thankfully I still have my S5.  I would not trust this seller to send you the specific version you need for your region.
Hi thereI ordered this samsung galaxy s7 on jun 17 nd everything was very very great until 2 week ago i just realized that in the screen there is one pixel wrong. Is almost imperseptible but if you focus on this pixel you can see how s*** it looks like
This phone is amazing. I love the curved display and the bigger battery. Any galaxy phone is already a monster, but the S7 and the S7 Edge dominate in most every area.The only this that this phone lacks is good audio quality from the speaker, but that is a very small problem since most people use speakers or headphones anyways.
I like this phone. Just a few problems.  I got it without the charging port for the phone. And  my home button seem as tho it was repaired but not repaired properly.  I have spent alot on this phone. I am not completely mad cause I love my new phone features. However I am a bit disappointed.
First of all this is the replacement phone I had to get for the note 7. So I'm very disappointed in it not having half as many features as the note 7. It always says my fingerprint is wrong. The processor is very slow and it lags up all of the time. The basic features are the same as every other new galaxy phone so it's not that bad
I've gotten this phone twice. One for my wife and one for myself and both come two days earlier from the date it was suppose to come. The phone itself is wonderful and works great nothing off from it. I recommend to buy this phone from here
Phone came broken,  charger ports are faulty. This is the second faulty phone i have recieved.  Dont know if the issue is samsung or the seller,  but I would advise everybody not to buy this phone. If you are buying a european phone in the US,  samsung usa will not be able to help you.
I love the phone but the wall adaptor is unable to work with my outlets and I tried using a different one and it literally took 24hr to charge and has a message saying due to the charge the phone is charging at the slowest rate.
love this phone I just got it directly from sprint though but so far it is great holds a charge well takes crystal clear photos the ringbacks and all other sounds are great this phone is lightning fast and very smooth I love this phone will use it until My next upgrade cannot wait to purchase the wireless charger!
Very Good Phone,and I buy the full screen protector and back protector,make the phone more beautiful [2 PACK] JIUSHIWO-Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge Screen Protector [Full Screen Coverage] + Clear Carbon Fiber Back Skin Protector / Front Anti-Bubble Ultra HD - Extreme Clarity & Touch Responsive Shield.
great phone, shipped super fast brand new in sealed box.
It's an awesome phone. The edge takes a little getting used to, but that's a small issue. Great camera, awesome sound in music and talking. Love the anti-glare. Seriously no glare from any angle. Even the headphones were great. Clear, crisp sounds. I bought the unlocked version and it works perfectly. Just had to insert the sim card and that was it. (And that's in the Caribbean) so for those customers wandering, it's definitely an Unlocked International Version. Highly recommended.
I bought this phone from T Mobile and so far it's great. The screen is big compared to my old iPhone 6. The AMOLED display makes images sharp and vibrant. Those were my first impressions of the phone. The last Samsung Galaxy product I bought was the Galaxy S4 a few years back, which had plenty of room for improvement. The S7 corrected past mistakes and excessive bloatware that was just unnecessary from previous generations. Most of the pre-installed apps that it does have meets my needs. They even took the time to organize them into their own folders just like I would most likely do.Pros:-Great display, in size and quality. I highly recommend playing with the Samsung Gear VR headset by Oculus. I have a review for that device on my public profile if you're looking for accessories but are unsure about them.-Camera takes sharp, clear images. Almost as good as iPhone in my opinion.-The phone itself loads any application efficiently with ease.-The battery life, so far is pretty great. I used my Galaxy s7 and went through ten, 23 minute episodes of my favorite show on 45% battery life and had less than 15% left. Netflix is the heaviest strain on my battery life, but the Galaxy S7 handles it with ease. I bought the wireless charger which is a convenient device that deserves its own review. You can find that on my public profile.-Expandable memory. Need I say more? I got a 128 GB micro SD card from that Wish.com app for a very cheap price and it works great. That brings the memory to my device up to 160 GB total. Yes, you read that right.Cons:If I compare speed to my older devices, such as an iPhone 6, the Galaxy S7 cannot keep up. While  it seems slower than other devices, the Galaxy S7 is still fast enough for my needs. I still give it five stars.I'm still looking for other flaws, but again, these are my first impressions of the device.I wasn't impressed with the Samsung Galaxy S4 to the point where I favored iPhone more for years. Samsung did great with this phone and made me not miss my iPhone.
This phone will SHATTER if you so much as look at it for too long.  I had the phone for 3 months with a rubber and plastic otterbox case on and in the process of tying my shoe dropped the phone from roughly 6 inches onto CARPETED FLOOR and the screen completely shattered to the point where it is unusable.  Repair the phone?  Sure, for almost 300$.  You could buy two cheaper phones with similar specifications for that price.  I am livid at the fragility of this phone and the absurd cost I could not suggest it to anyone.
I bought this cell some days ago and I couldn't be happier. This Latam version is working fine in Argentina. It's good to check before you buy if you cell works with in your country and carrier at [...] , very helpful...Thanks.
All issues regarding the Galaxy S7 edge were well received except for the app Samsung Pay. It doesn't seem to be available, tried to download and was presented with a Not compatible with this device warning. But for the most part, it meet all qualifications as advised.
In this era of technology, this flagship device destroys all the montony of other smsrtphones. i really like the curve surface and the habit of samsung tryin new things. the only reason i give 3 star is because the phone i got heats up a lot. and i have to keep it shut after playing games
I moved from ios to android and i felt like coming back home. Phone display , camera clarity amazing. Gold colour looks superb. Iphone 6 was so borning  and this phone feels very exciting. Price was also good for unlocked international verson. Battary easily works for day and half with moderate data usage throught day
The Samsung Galaxy S7 is perhaps the best mobile device right now. With so much technology, it has boosted the Galaxy S series. It is very easy to use and it makes you feel as if you don't have a mobile, instead you have so much more.
Just got this phone yesterday and so far I am liking the phone. I need to find a better screen protector for it. The ones on it now has the sides lifting because it doesn't appear to go all the way to the edge or tuck into the case. Fast processor is great!
Phone is absolutely amazing truely a smartphone. Even though my phone was a defect which got dead in 1 month and now getting replaced. International versions dont get US warranty so hold your wallet before shelling out big bucks. Phone is good but gaming experience is better on iphone. I am giving away my s7 edge and will buy next iphone since not getting warranty in usa on samsung but apple do provide.
Had an iphone 5s for 2 years with no issues. Had a samsung s7 for 2 weeks, dropped the phone on my FOOT (ouch btw because it weighs a frekin ton) and the screen cracked. How is this the latest and greatest, exactly? I find it slow and awkward, and the fact that it can survive being underwater (WOW THANKS SAMSUNG) but not being dropped 24 inches onto a softish target? I guess i am just the FIRST PERSON EVER to drop my phone. Amazing. Dont waste your money.
My husband and I bought these as an upgrade from our previous Galaxy S5s. I got the rose gold and he got the black one. The rose gold color wasn't as rosy as I thought it would be, it's more of a champagne color. The black one looks very sophisticated and elegant. I must say that I was not a fan of Samsung borrowing Apple's idea of no memory storage and making it difficult to put the sim card in but it was an easy fix with being able to send all of my extra photos to my Samsung account. Upon arrival, the packaging makes sure the product is not harmed whatsoever (lots and lots of bubble wrap). In all honesty I was afraid the phone was not going to hold up very long because of the glass edge and because I'm prone to dropping my phone...a lot. However even with out a case it has held up quite well. The photo quality of the front and rear camera is amazing, definitely a step (or two) up from the S5. We decided to buy on amazon because the price listed was $200-$300 cheaper than buying in stores, plus free 2 day shipping with Amazon Prime. All in all I would highly reccommend this phone if you're a Samsung lover like myself.
The worst built quality for any Samsung ever. I've had many Samsungs in my life and I've loved them all but this is the last Samsung phone I will ever buy. The screen cracked at the only and smallest drop it ever had (the phone had a case and screen protector). The Samsung customer support is the worst support I've ever seen.Don't buy this phone. Invest your money in something more durable and on a company with better customer service.
I was very surprise when I turn on the phone it seems that it was not new because it was already configured, I dont see the first time I turn on de Willkommen screen. It was configures in Dubai. The phone work, Also de charger is very sttrange , very big and with rare conectors.......The phone is very good but Im conserned that you send me something used whe I paid the full price.
Ok so I ended up getting this phone for free from family member getting a bogo deal... Had it not been for that I would've never spent $800 on this phone. I had an LG G3, and then a Nexus 5x before upgrading to this. Everyone is going to feel differently about different things but I feel like 5.3 inches is the optimal size for one hand usage, the edge screen just makes it even harder and uncomfortable to use with one hand. I definitely have made more mis-clicks on this phone than any other before, but less as time goes on. It's just so easy to forgive it because its absolutely gorgeous, it easily takes the cake for best looking phone on the market. It feels premium in the hand, I have a case on it but it feels like the right weight, not too light for a device of high quality. All of the buttons feel good when pressed, not mushy or cheap like the finger print sensor on LG G5 (500$ new in the box on ebay, with 60 day full refund policy), which is the phone I would have purchased had I not gotten this one for free, although I do prefer the finger print scanner on the back, coming from the Nexus 5x. You're finger is always right where it needs to be when you pull your phone out of your pocket. The battery life on this phone is insane, it takes about 1.5 hours to charge from 1-100%. But from a full charge I can stretch out over 6 hours of screen on time, over 20 hours of normal daily use before needing to be recharged, with heavy usage . It does lack some features such as usb c 3.1, which can charge the phone extremely fast; the ir blaster is also one of my favorite features on a phone. Sometimes the remote isn't near me, but my phone probably is. Overall this phone is pretty awesome, just not worth 800$, or even $650 on ebay.
After a few hours of use,unexpectly turned off,then it begins lagging and acting weird,just talk to amazon for help, they didn't help me because it was bought through a freight forwarder.i really feel like a wasted my savings for nothing
I bought the white version of the Samsung S7 edge and it is a amazing and gorgeous phone. It was really difficult to find it because it's not available for the US but it totally worth the trouble. I got the italian edition of it and it works nice and smooth with my Mexican SIM card, it doesn't has any preloaded content which is great and the preinstalled apps are the same as the US version. The only "issue" might be that the power connector of the charger is European, but the seller solved it in a great way by including an American adapter. I love my new phone and the whole experience was excellent with this seller.I used to be an iPhone lover, but Samsung did a great jog with this one and I'm perfectly happy of having taked the risk. Totally recommended!
Beautiful phone, features are awesome! Still discovering something new about this phone daily. The camera quality is the best I've seen yet.It's very difficult getting a screen protector that fits , bought 2 and they didn't fit the edges (although it stated that it was designed for S7 edge!!!)  Still trying to get one that fits.Very expensive phone though <f0><U+009F><U+0099><U+0081>!!! But I am really enjoying it...
phone would not work unless plugged into the charger and its got an internal battery so i had to return it brand new phone
I am very satisfied with S7 Edge, I have the international version. Fast charging, great photos and great screen.
May I know if this item is legit?Because plenty Samsung S7 edge out there are fake one.
Purchased Samsung Galaxy s7 Edge directly from Verizon Wireless.  First it was almost impossible to transfer contacts info, etc. from my old Samung phone through the Samung SmarkSwitch since the phone kept rebooting while trying to do.  I had to bring it to a Verizon store to get it done and should have returned phone then.Phone completely failed after 3 weeks, just a complete brick now.  With Verizon Wireless's 14 day return policy, I'm stuck with trying to get repaired. Recommendation, buy your phone through Amazon for their better return policy (which I did with my last phone).
I love the phone when it was working. Since it is an unlocked device no one seems to want to take responsibility for repairing it under warranty. I am having the famous grey line problem which seems to be a pretty wide spread problem with this phone.Samsung customer service is terrible. I have spent hours trying to find a way to get my device serviced and keep getting told to call someone else or someone will call me back in 24 to 48 hours and no one ever calls back.For Samsung customer service alone I will not buy another Samsung device ever again.
I love my S7 edge, the only thing is sometimes gets too hot.
Phone is great! It was a huge upgrade for me going from the Samsung Galaxy S5 to the S7 Edge. :) No problems as of yet, phone runs smooth and fast! I love the camera! The seller (Wireless Everything) was even kind enough to even include a US wall adapter along with the order.
Why is this phone UAE version? All support is in Arabic, I had to reset everything to American English. Now I have to leave it with the tech guys for a week to make sure there is no Spyware or Malware.Besides that, it's fine.
I am not happy with the phone because according to the phone description your website the phone should have two slot sin your website the phone should have two slot for SIM card  as was described for the middle east and African version. So I send the form back home  which is Ethiopia for my sister so she will be able to use it for school but now she  can't use it for school. And I bought that phone for $660 and I have no use for it now thanks
I had galaxy s3 and s5 for many years and was really happy. Samsung really blew it with this one.  It doesn't have a replaceable battery so you have to sit and wait for it to charge at the worst times. The back is made of glass so it will shatter with any fall. The "edge" is nothing more than annoying gimmick that further reduces the ability to protect the screen with cases. It comes loaded will bloatware that are basically poor clones of google software just so you will get stuck in the samsung eco-system. I am very disappointed and will not recommend it.
I upgraded from a galaxy s4 in march.  this phone is very good as far as the tech goes.  the edge screen is gimmicky, and I have no use for it.  I have semi-frequent accidental touches from holding the phone.  I only got the edge version for the bigger screen size.the battery isn't very good.  I get through a 9 hour shift at work and am usually in the 15%-20% remaining battery range.
Hands down the best cell phone I have ever owned. I have a iPhone 6 for work which I love, but this S7 beats it by a mile. Battery life is outstanding unlike so many Android phones, and the display and camera are top notch. I like this international version with the non-US processor and it seems to be getting better battery life than the Snapdragon processor for the domestic market. Either version though is still the best on the market.
Incompatible with AT&T, no 4G reception
No issues so far. The phone is great!
all according to expectations
Although my shipping experience was a bit troublesome, the product itself its amazing! I knew it was international version but was not expecting a UK plug, best part is I get almost not bloatware
just what I was looking for
I Bought this phone as a gift for my sister and brother in Europe. The phones arrived in brand new condition with seal and in a timely manner. They absolutely love the Samsung over their previous phones( iPhone6). They have stated the phone is absolutely amazing and beautiful. It works wonderfully for their purpose and the quality is good. Watching videos look great and the photo quality is gorgeous. They are happy with the expansive memory.
package was sent with the warranty seal opened however the seller clarified the reason of that. Phone works fine.My previous phone was a Samsung 5 but this one is amazing.
I didn't like the fact that the phone came with a charger that can't be used because it doesn't have the prongs for this country and all instructions were in another language
The phone was working pretty awesome then it just crashed and wouldn't turn on. Did all the troubleshooting I could and it still wouldn't turn on. So I had to return item.
Arrived on time and in perfect condition works perfect and very fast loading file and surfing,one of the best phones I have brought and will recommend to everyone
So far so good. The only thing I just found out is that since it's an international unlocked phone from Italy I don't have warranty here for the phone in the US.
Perfect. Great phone
Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge Factory Unlocked Phone 32 GB - International Version G935F- Black OynxAbsolutely disappointing, the charging port was hurt at 4 days, and today after 10 days has begun to smoke and smell of burning. I'll have to repair the "new" cell. I'm angry and I'll never buy in this shop.
This phone what can I say .... it's fast nice feel to it .... no lag... Samsung will be samsung they will only get better and better...
Really great phone
Excelent product.
This is my 2nd Samsung Galaxy S7 as the privious one was stolen.  I love every aspect of this phone.  It worth every penny.
Telephone edge Dandy Yes, it's a phone in the top extravaganza I've loved phone I am very happy very, very strong
Shipment arrived on time.  So far, the best phone I've owned.  Takes some effort to locate and update the device firmware.
I love the phone but I hate how some features aren't available such as android pay (Not available in my area), and also the changing time. It takes approx 40 min to charge from 30 percent using fast charge and fast charge products.If anyone can recommend a solution it would be greatly appreciated.Using a European version GS7 Edge in the USA. I don't know if it's the voltage.
I am kind of angry to buy this and now I realized what the hack does international version mean. This is an international version which is far inferior to US counterpart. What I got is an Italian version. Some stupid Italian company's apps were pre-installed and cannot uninstall them.1. You cannot use Samsung pay with this version2. CPU is VFPv4 Neon which is far interior to the US version made by Qualcom3. I performed benchmarks with AnTuTu apps: SM-G935F (this model) is very under-performed. especially in graphics score 20781 (this model) vs 33831(Original US version) - this phone is around 35% under-performed than US conterpart.4. As I said, you cannot uninstall some stupid foreign cell-phone company's apps. Starting with foreign languages is a bonus.I hate Samsung to build these variations all the time to fool around the customers. Please check everything possible before you buy the Samsung products. AND buy US version all the time. This would not happen to Iphone which I used right before this one.
I already have this phone for about a month and I haven't found any problem with it. Is legit and works perfectly.
I purchased my phone from BestBuy in March 2016- I had  the salesperson apply the front screen protective film and put it in a protective case before I left the store. 6 months later the camera lens spontaneously developed spiderweb cracking. This is a known issue and you can google the threads on it. The customer service rep was very helpful- here's a free UPS label, send the charger too and repair will be free. 9 days later the repair guy calls and says it will be $71 to repair 'physical damage'. I sent credit card payment that day. 4 days later the charge posts on my account. I have been without a phone since August 30. I liked the phone, but Samsung needs to own this issue. Just because my phone isn't setting things on fire doesn't mean there aren't other defects in their products
