"I’m not going to this place again. Though the ambiance is good, Flechazo Gachibowli deeply lacks a sense of hygiene. We went there as a family. The first thing that caught our attention was the extremely sticky floor. The chefs at the live counters very well display the hygiene standards of this place. You find them standing idle meddling with the ingredients, scratching their heads and using their gloved hands to handle everything around. Another unique practice I noticed was that,  while the waiter serves you the starters, he is constantly touching the serving spoons/tongs to the half eaten food in your plate. Then you find him serving the same starters to the next table. 
The place is chaotic, with open dried up ingredients and food kept at most counters. The main course buffet has limited choices too. 
But for the well thought of ambience, there is nothing positive I could write about this place."
"The starters were good . Especially mutton starter , They are many varieties in Chicken then other items .
The ambience is so good and the staff is great .
Jayanta service was very good and food was on time. Thanks to them ."
"Flechazo brings together two culinary regions of the the world- The Mediterranean and Asian. It has a minimalistic ambiance with maximised seating which serves as an ideal place for celebration or office gatherings.
Food shots on the conveyor belt has got an amazing response from the customers dining in. Gol Gappas, kachoris and the chaat options are a fun factor that makes up for the DIY concept to the table.
Starters: Stuffed Mushroom is a good option and Veg tempura is well balanced in its spice content.
Main course: You will have a whale of time picking out options in biryani, rice and curries. Leave some space for the pasta though.
Dessert: This section gives a whole new meaning to the term ""spoilt for choice"".
This place is indeed a foodie's delight."
"Visited on 12 may 2019, for lunch with family. Awesome food, comfortable seating, soothing ambience. Booked table through Zomato and received confirmation in 3 minutes!!
Went in early at 11.30am (brunch!). Welcome drink, soup and starters served at the table.. they have a mango festival till end of the month so most of the dishes have mango in them, super delicious.
Apart from the buffet spread, they have live counters for pizza, pasta, chaats (Pani Puri yummm...), sushi, keema kulcha and few others one bite snacks.. starters are aplenty; veg and non veg.. the servers are attentive and helpful.
Desserts was a mix of Indian sweets, pasteries, cheesecakes, fruits, and their speciality liquid nitrogen ice-cream, fun to watch though I am not sure if healthy..
I was surprised with a Mother's Day cake, complements of the restaurant.. that was a wow gesture.. a must visit place for celebrations or whenever you are hungry for variety and lots of food!!"
I was there on the Mother’s Day and food was amazing . service by Jayanta ggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggd
"I went to this place for lunch buffet by seeing the high ratings in zomato.
Good things first, the service is excellent! The waiters literally takes care of you when you are there.
Food: nothing great. As am more of a ""starter"" person , I love to have it in abundance but the starters were served on the table which ofcourse it's not served the way you like it. The sushi and Pani Puri were very okay-ish type
Main course was very normal, nothing extra ordinary. Taste of the food was very normal.
In dessert the red velvet cake and jalebi was good.
Service: it's very good and all the servers are trained very well.
Ambience: The place was jammed packed even for a Tuesday lunch. Couldn't enjoy that much as there was rush in front of every counter.
All in all a very okay-ish lunch!"
"Love dis place...
Good in terms of ambience,food & hospitality 
Live pizza & smokey ice cream are best...
Highlight was dance steps by the staff for birthday celebrations..."
"Good food
Nice experience
Haleem missing was a bit of disappointment serves so good jayanta ggggggggggggggggggghhhggggggggggggggggggggggggggg"
Excellent service and ambience and very friendly staff. Thank you Ranjan and Sadddam and Raja for the wonderful service. Will surely visit for a fun time again
Md. Sabir is very good at service. Must try this place if you're nearby.. staff is very professional polite and friendly. They'll make you feel comfortable 
"Heard about this restaurant from a friend and choose this place to have team lunch.
Worst experience"
Pathetic. Unprofessional staff. Bouncers will make you wait for 15-20 mins at the entrance even if you have made an advance booking for office party. Moreover, they ask to call any member from your group who is already in to verify whether booking is done or not, party is going on or not. If it was my personal party I would have immediately cancelled the booking and have gone somewhere else. 
They don't have any options.. they have an elaborate menu but have very few options available. Waste of going there... Service was not good too.... Cocktails were costly but they don't taste good at all... 
"Very overpriced diluted drinks. On complaining the bartender said, it has very high alcohol content, blah blah and we don't know how the cocktails are made. Very arrogant and rude staff. The order took forever to come. Not sure if this is a Saturday night rush issue or a regular thing. 
When our order finally arrived, they got it wrong.
The dance floor was very crowded and some people were pushing us.
The only good part was 2+2 with zomato gold.
In the final bill, they charged us for 6 extra drinks and refused to update bill.
If you are a party of 4-5 people, please avoid this place."
"I went there on sat night with my friends to have a fun weekend.... the place was lit . Ambience was amazing ... they have a rooftop arrangemnt where u can sit and njoy ur drinks and then be ready to move those feets with the cool dj ...
We ordered a couple of whiskey & beer, one cocktail named cosmopolitian and a mocktail...
The dj shut down at around 12.30 to 1 am ...
Overall i had a blast and the place is really cool for all those who love to party "
"Ok place for casual hangouts. 
Food wasn’t so great, it was ok ok. There weren’t many options for drinks as well. Service was also not so great I would say. "
"I had been to this place last weekend with family. I must say the service is excellent. Coming to the ambience, the dance floor and the area beside that looks great, but the rooftop wasn't that interesting. 1 less star only for that. But other than that the food was good but not that great. We ordered:
1. Budweiser (3)
Many of our friends had many issues from this restaurant, like delivering different food from ordered food, and delivering one shawarma instead of two and others
Zomato authority should take of all these problems which are spoiling the name and fame"
Food and taste is fabulous, nothing there to complaint but the way they use containers for delivery need to improve. Sometimes for curry orders packages are leaking out. To be top all the facilities provided by restaurant should be in best quality😍
Ordered special chicken biryani. Biryani was great in taste but ambience was not good. Also this restaurant is too unhygienic and over crowded. 
"Absolutely everything about shah ghouse is amazing. You wouldn't mind the ambience much as food is finger licking good. You can tell that the place serves good food as it is always crowded. They serve the best mutton biryans, shawarmas and murgh musallam ( not sure of the spelling).
5 stars 🌟 only for the food 🤤"
"Will be visiting this place at least twice in a month
Chicken biriyani and chicken lollipop will be fab here..
Prawns curry and rumali roti is good.must try Dryfruit Falooda and butterscotch falooda"
Shwarma was really good. Biryani was average with hard huge chicken pieces. Paneer dish was also average. They have seating for everyone from bachelors to family. 
The biryani here I found very delicious, worth of money. All spices were blended and mixed well, but one thing they used a lot of spices that could probably disturb the taste
Amazing taste as compare to all other restaurants around Gacchibowli Telecom nagar HYDERABAD.they follow all instructions care fully so 5star
I ordered an egg biriyani and got a chicken piece in it, disgusting! Never ever going to order from this restaurant again. Disappointed.....
not at all fresh
The Chicken SP Biriyani was just delicious. Wonderful service. First try in Hyderabad. Definitely one of the best experiences. High speed delivery and hot food.
Ordered veg biryani here, the vegetables they used especially beans are awful. The are almost became like drumstick on chewing and cant eat them. Will never order again neither recommend to any.
Shah Ghouse Biryani is better than Paradise. It's is very soft and warm when you open a packet and nice spice scent. good quality of chicken its uses for Biryani, I always prefer to eat first this one in Biryani category.
Me and my friends has a mandi at Shah Ghouse restaurant which was at Gachibowli, and our experience was really poor comparing to others restaurants in Hyderabad. 
Worst food, no quality this would be the worst biryani I ever i had in my entire life. This the chicken biryani without chicken and the chicken is mashed up and keema and I would say this is chicken keema biryani 🤣🤣🤣. 
Food taste better here. The food servicing is not that much good. The food preparation time is bit high. If you have patience to wait then you can give a try for it. 
The Taste of Biryani is So Good, Rate is Pocket Friendly. I Recommend Shah Ghouse for Good Biryani.Good Food Good Taste. Like Shah Ghouse Biryani.
delivered on time